<<main.xhtml>>

MICHAEL SWAN

Practical

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Fully Revised

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

English

Usage

Easier, faster reference

OXJFORD

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

PRACTICAL

ENGLISH

USAGE

Third Edition

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

<<main.xhtml#bookmark0>>OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford 0x2 6dp

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.

It Anthers the University's objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide in

Oxford New York

Auckland Cape Town Dares Salaam Hong Kong Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid
Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi New Delhi Shanghai 'feipei Toronto

With offices in

Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece Guatemala
Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore South Korea Switzerland
Thailand Ttirkey Ukraine Vietnam

oxford and oxford English are registered trade marks of Oxford
University Press in the UK and in certain other countries

G Michael Swan 2005

The moral rights of the author have been asserted

Database right Oxford University Press (maker)

First published 2005 2009 2008 2007 2006 10 9 8 7 6 5 4

No unauthorized photocopying

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University
Press, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the
appropriate reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning
reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT
Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above

You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover and you
must impose this same condition on any acquirer

Any websites referred to in this publication are in the public domain
and their addresses are provided by Oxford University Press for
information only. Oxford University Press disclaims any responsibility
for the content

ISBN-13: 978 019 4420990 (hardback) isbn-io: 019 442099 X isbn-13: 978 o
19 442098 3 (paperback) isbn-io: 0194420981

Printed in China

PRACTICAL ENGLISH USAGE

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Dedication

To John Eckersley, who first encouraged my interest in this kind of
thing.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark1>>Acknowledgements

I am grateful to all the people who have helped me with the preparation
of this third edition. A large number of teachers in different countries
were kind enough to respond to an enquiry asking how they felt Practical
English Usage could be improved: their feedback was extremely helpful,
and I am very much in their debt. I am also gready indebted to David
Baker, whose comments and suggestions have added very significandy to
the accuracy and clarity of the book, and to Hideo Hibino and Kenji
Kashino, who have contributed valuable advice on specific problems. Many
other teachers and students - too many to name -have taken the trouble
to suggest ways in which particular entries could be improved; their
input has benefited die book considerably. My use of the internet as a
source of instances of authentic usage has been gready facilitated by
the kind assistance of Hiroaki Sato, of Senshu University, Japan, who
made available his excellent software tool KwiconGugle. I must also
reacknowledge my debt to Jonathan Blundell, Norman Coe, Michio Kawakami,
Michael Macfarlane, Nigel Middlemiss, Keith Mitchell, Catherine Walter,
Gareth Watkins, and the many other consultants and correspondents whose
help and advice with the preparation of the first and second editions
continue as an important contribution to the third.

Any pedagogic grammarian owes an enormous debt to the academic linguists
on whose research he or she is parasitic. There is not enough space to
mention all the scholars of the last hundred years or so on whose work I
have drawn directly or indirecdy, even if I had a complete record of my
borrowings. But I must at least pay homage to two monumental reference
works of the present generation: the Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language, by Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech and Svartvik (Longman
1985), and the Cambridge Grammar of the English Language, by Huddleston,
Pullum and others (Cambridge University Press 2002). Their authoritative
accounts of the facts of English structure and usage constitute an
essential source of information for anyone writing pedagogic grammar
materials today.

Finally, it is with particular pleasure that I express my gratitude,
once again, to the editorial, design and production team at Oxford
University Press, whose professional expertise is matched only by their
concern to make an author's task as trouble-free as possible.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark2>>Contents summary

|                           | Page        |
| Acknowledgments           | vi          |
| Introduction              | viii-x      |
| Contents Overview         | xi-xvi      |
| Language Terminology      | xvii-xxv    |
| Don't say it:             |             |
| 130 common mistakes       | xxvi-xxix   |
| Phonetic alphabet         | XXX         |
| Practical English Usage   | 1-623       |
| Index                     | 624-658     |

Michael Swan

PRACTICAL

ENGLISH

USAGE

Third Edition

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

<<main.xhtml#bookmark3>>OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford 0x2 6dp

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.

It Anthers the University's objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide in

Oxford New York

Auckland Cape Town Dares Salaam Hong Kong Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid
Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi New Delhi Shanghai 'feipei Toronto

With offices in

Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece Guatemala
Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore South Korea Switzerland
Thailand Ttirkey Ukraine Vietnam

oxford and oxford English are registered trade marks of Oxford
University Press in the UK and in certain other countries

G Michael Swan 2005

The moral rights of the author have been asserted

Database right Oxford University Press (maker)

First published 2005 2009 2008 2007 2006 10 9 8 7 6 5 4

No unauthorized photocopying

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University
Press, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the
appropriate reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning
reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT
Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above

You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover and you
must impose this same condition on any acquirer

Any websites referred to in this publication are in the public domain
and their addresses are provided by Oxford University Press for
information only. Oxford University Press disclaims any responsibility
for the content

ISBN-13: 978 019 4420990 (hardback) isbn-io: 019 442099 X isbn-13: 978 o
19 442098 3 (paperback) isbn-io: 0194420981

Printed in China

PRACTICAL ENGLISH USAGE

Dedication

To John Eckersley, who first encouraged my interest in this kind of
thing.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark4>>Acknowledgements

I am grateful to all the people who have helped me with the preparation
of this third edition. A large number of teachers in different countries
were kind enough to respond to an enquiry asking how they felt Practical
English Usage could be improved: their feedback was extremely helpful,
and I am very much in their debt. I am also gready indebted to David
Baker, whose comments and suggestions have added very significandy to
the accuracy and clarity of the book, and to Hideo Hibino and Kenji
Kashino, who have contributed valuable advice on specific problems. Many
other teachers and students - too many to name -have taken the trouble
to suggest ways in which particular entries could be improved; their
input has benefited die book considerably. My use of the internet as a
source of instances of authentic usage has been gready facilitated by
the kind assistance of Hiroaki Sato, of Senshu University, Japan, who
made available his excellent software tool KwiconGugle. I must also
reacknowledge my debt to Jonathan Blundell, Norman Coe, Michio Kawakami,
Michael Macfarlane, Nigel Middlemiss, Keith Mitchell, Catherine Walter,
Gareth Watkins, and the many other consultants and correspondents whose
help and advice with the preparation of the first and second editions
continue as an important contribution to the third.

Any pedagogic grammarian owes an enormous debt to the academic linguists
on whose research he or she is parasitic. There is not enough space to
mention all the scholars of the last hundred years or so on whose work I
have drawn directly or indirecdy, even if I had a complete record of my
borrowings. But I must at least pay homage to two monumental reference
works of the present generation: the Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language, by Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech and Svartvik (Longman
1985), and the Cambridge Grammar of the English Language, by Huddleston,
Pullum and others (Cambridge University Press 2002). Their authoritative
accounts of the facts of English structure and usage constitute an
essential source of information for anyone writing pedagogic grammar
materials today.

Finally, it is with particular pleasure that I express my gratitude,
once again, to the editorial, design and production team at Oxford
University Press, whose professional expertise is matched only by their
concern to make an author's task as trouble-free as possible.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark5>>Contents summary

|                           | Page        |
| Acknowledgments           | vi          |
| Introduction              | viii-x      |
| Contents Overview         | xi-xvi      |
| Language Terminology      | xvii-xxv    |
| Don't say it:             |             |
| 130 common mistakes       | xxvi-xxix   |
| Phonetic alphabet         | XXX         |
| Practical English Usage   | 1-623       |
| Index                     | 624-658     |

<<main.xhtml#bookmark6>>Introduction

<<main.xhtml#bookmark7>>The purpose of this book

English, like all languages, is full of problems for the foreign
learner. Some of these points are easy to explain - for instance, the
formation of questions, the difference between since and for, the
meaning of after all. Other problems are more tricky, and cause
difficulty even for advanced students and teachers. How exactly is the
present perfect used? When do we use past tenses to be polite? What are
the differences between at, on and in with expressions of place? We can
say a chair leg- why not * a cat teg? When can we use the expression do
sol When is the used with superlatives? Is unless the same as if not?
What are the differences between come and go, between each and every,
between big, large and great, between fairly, quite, rather and pretty?
Is it correct to say There's three more bottles in the fridge? How do
you actually say 3x4= 12? And so on, and so on.

Practical English Usage is a guide to problems of this kind. It deals
with over 600 points which regularly cause difficulty to foreign
students of English. It will be useful, for example, to a learner who is
not sure how to use a particular structure, or who hgs made a mistake
and wants to find out why it is wrong. It will also be helpful to a
teacher who is looking for a clear explanation of a difficult language
point. There is very full coverage of grammar, as well as explanations
of a large number of common vocabulary problems. There are also some
entries designed to clarify more general questions (e.g. formality,
slang, the nature of standard English and dialects) which students and
teachers may find themselves concerned with.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark8>>Level

The book is intended for higher level students of English and for
teachers. Being a reference book, it contains information at various
levels, ranging from relatively simple points to quite advanced
problems.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark9>>Organisation

Problems are mostly explained in short separate entries: the book is
more like a dictionary than a grammar in form. This makes it possible to
give a clear complete treatment of each point, and enables the user to
concentrate just on the question that he or she needs information about.
Entries that deal with related topics (e.g. different uses of a tense)
are grouped where this is useful, but can be read separately. In longer
entries, basic information is generally given first, followed by more
detailed explanations and discussions of less important points. Entries
are arranged alphabetically by title and numbered in sequence. A
comprehensive Index (pages 624-658) shows where each point can be found
(see ^{f}How to find things', page x).

<<main.xhtml#bookmark10>>Approach and style

I have tried to make the presentation as practical as possible. Each
entry contains an explanation of a problem, examples of correct usage,
and (when this is useful) examples of typical mistakes. In some cases,
an explanation may be somewhat different from that found in many
learners' grammars; this is because the rules traditionally given for
certain points (e.g. conditionals or indirect speech) are not always
accurate or helpful. Explanations are, as far as possible in simple
everyday language. Where it has been necessary to use grammatical
terminology, 1 have generally preferred to use traditional terms that
are simple and easy to understand, except where this would be seriously
misleading. Some of these terms (e.g. future tense) would be regarded as
unsatisfactory by academic grammarians, but I am not writing for
specialists. There is a dictionary of the terminology used in the book
on pages xvii-xxv.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark11>>The kind of English described

The explanations deal mainly with standard modem everyday British
English, and are illustrated with realistic examples of current usage.
Both explanations and examples have been thoroughly checked against
large electronic databases ('corpora') of authentic spoken and written
English. Stylistic differences (e.g. between formal and informal usage,
or spoken and written language) are mentioned where this is appropriate.
The few grammatical differences between British and American English are
also described, and there is a good deal of information about other
British-American differences, but the book is not intended as a
systematic guide to American usage.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark12>>Correctness

If people say that a form is not ‘correct', they can mean several
different things. They may for instance be referring to a sentence like
*/ have seen her yesterday, which normally only occurs in the English of
foreigners. They may be thinking of a usage like less people (instead of
fewer people), which is common in standard English but regarded as wrong
by some people. Or they may be talking about forms like * ain't or
‘double negatives', which are used in speech by many British and
American people, but which do not occur in the standard dialects and are
not usually written. This book is mainly concerned with the first kind
of ‘correctness': the differences between British or American English
and ‘foreign' English. However, there is also information about cases of
divided usage in standard English, and about a few important dialect
forms. (For a discussion of different kinds of English, see 308-309.)

<<main.xhtml#bookmark13>>How important is correctness?

If someone makes too many mistakes in a foreign language, he or she can
be difficult to understand, so a reasonable level of correctness is
important. However, it is quite unnecessary to speak or write a language
perfectly in order to communicate effectively (very few adults in fact
achieve a perfect command of another language). Learners should aim to
avoid serious mistakes (and a book like Practical English Usage will
help considerably with this); but they should not become obsessed with
correctness, or worry every time they make a mistake. Grammar is not the
most important thing in the world!

<<main.xhtml#bookmark14>>What this book does not do

Practical English Usage is not a complete guide to the English language.
As the title suggests, its purpose is practical: to give learners and
their teachers the most important information they need in order to deal
with common language problems. Within this framework, the explanations
are as complete and accurate as I can make them. However it is not
always helpful or possible in a book of this kind to deal with all the
details of a complex structural point; so readers may well find
occasional exceptions to some of the grammatical rules given here.
Equally, the book does not aim to replace a dictionary. While it gives
information about common problems with the use of a number of words, it
does not attempt to describe other meanings or uses of the words beside
those points that are selected for attention.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark15>>Other reference books

A book like this gives explanations of individual points of usage, but
does not show how the separate points ‘fit together'. Those who need a
systematically organised account of the whole of English grammar should
consult a book such as the Oxford Learner's Grammar, by John Eastwood
(Oxford University Press), A Student's Grammar of the English Language,
by Greenbaum and Quirk (Longman), or Collins Cobuild English Grammar
(Collins). For a detailed treatment of English vocabulary, see the
Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary, the Cambridge Advanced Learner's
Dictionary, the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, the
Macmillan English Dictionary or the Collins Cobuild English Dictionary.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark16>>Changes in the third edition

English, like all languages, is changing, and British English is
currendy being quite strongly influenced by American English.
Consequently, some usages which were unusual in standard British English
a few decades ago have now become common - for example, the use of like
as a conjunction (e.g. like I do), or the use of Do you have...? to ask
about the immediate present (e.g. Do you have a light?). The third
edition takes account of a number of changes of this kind, in order to
give a fully up-to-date description of contemporary usage.

<<main.xhtml#bookmark17>>How to find things

The best way to find information about a particular point is to look in
the Index on pages 624-658. (The overview on pages xi-xvi is intended
only to give a general picture of the topics covered in the book; it is
not a complete guide to the contents.) Most points are indexed under
several different names, so it is not difficult to locate the entry you
need. For instance, if you want to know why we say I'm not used to
driving on the left instead of I'm not used to drive on the left, you
can find the number of the section where this is explained by looking in
the index under ‘used', ‘be used', ‘to* or ‘-ing forms'. (On the other
hand, it would obviously not be helpful to look under ‘drive*: the rule
is a general one about the use of -ing forms after be used to, not about
the verb drive in particular.)

<<main.xhtml#bookmark18>>Contents Overview

This overview gives a general picture of the topics covered in the book;
it is not a complete guide to the contents. References are to entry
numbers. To find information about a particular point, consult the Index
on pages 624-658,

<<main.xhtml#bookmark19>>verbs, tense and aspect

future 211-221

present tenses 461-466

past simple and progressive 421-422 perfect verb forms 427 present
perfect 455-460 past perfect 423-425 progressive (continuous) verb forms
470-472

past verb form with present or future meaning 426 tense simplification
in subordinate clauses (present for future, past for would etc) 580

<<main.xhtml#bookmark20>>be, do, have and modal auxiliaries

auxiliary verbs 85

be 89-92 there is 587 do 158-162 have 234-239

modal verbs 353-354 can and could 121-125 may and might 338-344 can,
could, may and might compared 345 must 358-361 ought 403 should 518-521

should, ought and must compared 520 will 629 would 633

<<main.xhtml#bookmark21>>infinitives and participles

infinitives 279-292 -ing forms 293-294 -ing forms used like nouns
(gerunds) 295-298 -ing form or infinitive after remember, go on etc 299
-ing and -ed forms used as adjectives (participles) 408-411

<<main.xhtml#bookmark22>>verbs: other points

active verb forms 10 passives 412-420

subjunctive 567

link verbs: be, seem, look etc 328

irregular verbs 304

verb complementation (what can follow a verb?) 606 verbs with two
objects 610 verb + object + complement 607 two-part verbs: phrasal verbs
599; prepositional verbs 600

verbs of movement {she ran in etc) 608 turning verbs into nouns 598

older English verb forms 392 nouns

singular and plural 523-532 countable and uncountable nouns 148-149

gender (references to males and females) 222 piece- and group-words {a
bar of chocolate, a bunch of flowers etc) 430

possessive's 439-440 noun + noun 385-386

complementation (what can follow a noun?) 384

<<main.xhtml#bookmark23>>pronouns

personal pronouns

(/, me, you etc) 428-9 reflexive pronouns {myself etc) 493 each other
and one another 171 indefinite pronouns (somebody, someone, anything
etc) 548 interrogative which, what, who etc 622-624

one: substitute word (a big one etc) 395

possessives and demonstratives: see determiners relative who, whom,
which, that etc 494-497 whoever, whatever etc 625

<<main.xhtml#bookmark24>>determiners [the, my, some, several etc)

introduction 154

articles (a/an and the) 61-70 possessives {my, mine etc) 441-443
demonstratives

{this, that, these, those) 589-590

all 35-40

another and other(s) 54 any 55

any and every 56 both 110 each 169

each and every 170 every (one) 193 either 174 enough 187 half 231

less and fewer 320 least and fewest 318 (a) little and (a) few 329 [a]
lot 333 more 355 most 356

much and many 357

neither (of) 372

no, none and not a/any 376

so much and so many 542

some 546

some and any 547

too much and too many 596

<<main.xhtml#bookmark25>>adjectives

position 12-14 order before nouns 15

complementation (what can follow an adjective?) 19

adjectives with and 16

adjectives without nouns 17

pronunciation of aged, naked etc 18

<<main.xhtml#bookmark26>>adverbs

position 21-25

adverbs of manner and adjectives 26 adverbs or adjectives? confusing
cases 27

adverb particles 20

<<main.xhtml#bookmark27>>comparison

structures 135

as ... as; as much/many as 136 comparative and superlative adjectives
and adverbs 137-141

<<main.xhtml#bookmark28>>prepositions

general introduction 448 at the ends of clauses 452 before conjunctions
453 before -ing forms 454 before and after particular words and
expressions 449-450 prepositional verbs 600 expressions without
prepositions 451

particular prepositions about and on 4 above and over 6 according to 8
across, over and through 9 along 45

(a)round and about 60 at/in and to 80 at, on and in: place 81 at, on and
in: time 82 before and in front of 98

below, under, underneath and beneath 100 between and among 105 by: time
117 by and near 118 by (method, agent) and with (tools etc) 119 due to
and owing to 166 during and for 167 during and in 168 for: purpose and
cause 207 for, since, in and from: time 208 in and into, on and onto 269
in and to 270 in spite of 272 instead of 301

like and as: similarity, function 326 near (to) 365

opposite, facing and in front of 402

out of 404

through: time 592

until 602

up and down 603

with 631

<<main.xhtml#bookmark29>>conjunctions

general conjunctions 510 sentence structure 511

particular conjunctions and 52

and after try, wait, go etc 53

as and though: special word order 71

as if and as though; like 74

as long as 75

as well as 78

because 94

before 97

both ... and 111

either... or 175

how 252

immediately, the moment etc 267 it's time (that) 306 lest 321

neither... nor 373

neither, nor and not... either 374

not only ... 383

now (that) 387

once 394

so that and in order that 543 that-dauses 583 omission of that 584
unless 601 when and if 618 whether ... or... 620 whether and if 621

<<main.xhtml#bookmark30>>word order and sentence organisation

basic word order 509 inversion (verb before subject) 302-303 fronting
(e.g. People like that I can't stand) 513 information structure 512
emphasis 184

<<main.xhtml#bookmark31>>various structures

questions 480-486 question tags 487-488 negative structures 367-371
imperatives 268, 323 {let) exclamations 195

direct speech: reporting verbs and word order 156 indirect speech
(reported speech) 274-278

relatives {the person who ... etc): 494-498 whoever, whatever etc 625

if 256-265

preparatory it: 446-447 cleft sentences: what I need is a holiday 130;
it was my secretary who ... 131

ellipsis (leaving out words) 177-182

understanding complicated sentences 515

<<main.xhtml#bookmark32>>constructing text

discourse markers (linking expressions) 157 paragraphs 406 repetition
500

correspondence letters 146

emails and text messages 147

<<main.xhtml#bookmark33>>spoken grammar

contractions 143 spoken structures and tags 514 short answers [Yes, he
can etc) 517 reply questions {Was it? Did you?) 484

<<main.xhtml#bookmark34>>special kinds of language

abbreviations and acronyms 2 idioms, collocations and fixed expressions
255

politeness using questions 435 distancing verb forms 436 softening
expressions 437 'social' language 545

varieties and styles of English American and British English 51 standard
English and dialects 308 correctness 309

spoken and written English 310

formality 311

variation and change 312

abbreviated styles 1

headlines 240

slang 533

taboo words and swearwords 575

<<main.xhtml#bookmark35>>topic areas

age 32 dates 152 meals 347

measurements: 'marked' and ‘unmarked' forms 350 names [Florence, Homer
etc) 362 names and titles [Peter, Mr Lewis) 363 nationalities, countries
and regions 364 numbers 389 telephoning 578 telling the time 579

<<main.xhtml#bookmark36>>spelling and punctuation

spelling 556-565 punctuation 473-479

<<main.xhtml#bookmark37>>pronunciation

stress and rhythm 554

intonation 555

weak and strong forms 616

<<main.xhtml#bookmark38>>word-building

prefixes and suffixes 445

<<main.xhtml#bookmark39>>confusable words and expressions

accept and agree 7 all right and alright 41 allow, permit and let 42
almost and nearly; practically 43 alone, lonely, lonesome and lone 44
also, as well and too 46-47 alternately and alternatively 48 although,
though, but and however: contrast 49 altogether and all together 50
arise and rise 59 as, because, since and for 72 as, when and while:
simultaneous events 73 at first and first 84 (a)wake and (a)waken 86
back and again 87 bath and bathe 88 beat and win 93 begin and start 99
beside and besides 101 besides, except and apart from 102 big, large and
great 106 born and borne 108 borrow and lend 109 bring and take 112
bring up and educate 113 Britain, the United Kingdom, the British Isles
and England 114 broad and wide 115 care: take care (of), care (about)
and care for 127 changes (become, get, go, grow etc) 128 city and town
129 classic and classical 254 close and shut 132 cloth and clothes 133
come and go 134 comic and comical 254 continual(ly) and continuous(ly)
142 dead, died and death 153 east and eastern, north and northern etc
172

economic and economical 254 efficient and effective 173 electric and
electrical 254 end and finish; verbs 185 especiai(ly) and special(ly)
188 except and except for 194 expect, hope, wait and look forward 196
experiment and experience 197 fairly, quite, rather and pretty: adverbs
of degree 199 far and a long way 200 farther and further 201 female and
feminine; male and masculine 203 finally, at last, in the end and at the
end 204 fit and suit 206 forget and leave 209 fun and funny 210 get and
go: movement 225 hear and listen (to) 241 here and there 245 high and
tall 246 hire, rent and let 247 historic and historical 254 holiday and
holidays 248 how and what... like? 253 ill and sick 266 in case and if
271 its and it's 305 last, the last, the latest 314 later and in 315 lay
and He 316

long and (for) a long time 330

lose and loose 332

loudly and aloud 334

magic and magical 254

maybe and perhaps 346

next and the next; nearest 375

no more, not any more, no longer 379

not and no 382

opportunity and possibility 400 play and game 432 politic and political
254 politics and policy 438 price and prize 468 principal and principle
469 road and street 502

say and tell 504

sensible and sensitive 508

shade and shadow 516

small and little 534

so (conjunction) and then 537

sometime, sometime and sometimes 549

soon, early and quickly 550

such and so 569

speak and talk 553

thankful and grateful 582

travel, journey, trip and voyage 597

whose and who's 627

<<main.xhtml#bookmark40>>other words and expressions

[be] able to 3 actual(ly) 11 afraid 28 after: adverb 29 after:
conjunction 30 after all 31 ago 33 alike 34

any (any better etc) 57

appear 58

as: structures 581

as such 76

as usual 77

ask 79

at all 83

before: adverb 96 bet 103 better 104 [a] bit 107

but meaning 'except' 116

call 120

can't help 126

contrary 144

control 145

country 150

dare 151

different 155

divorce 337

doubt 163

dress 164

drown 165

elder and eldest 176

else 183

enjoy 186

even 189

eventual(ly) 190 ever 191

ever so, ever such 192 explain 198 feel 202 finished 205

first (this is the first... etc): tenses 591

get: meanings and structures 223-224

give with action-nouns 226

go/come for a ... 227

go/come .. .ing 228

gone with be 229

had better 230

happen to ... 232

hardly, scarcely and no sooner 233

hear, see etc + object + verb form 242

hear, see etc with that-clause 243

help 244

home 249

hope 250

hopefully 251

indeed 273

just 307

know 313

last (this is the last... etc): tenses 591 learn 317 left 319 let:
322-323

life: countable or uncountable 324

like: verb 325

likely 327

look 331

make: 335-336

marry 337

mean 348

means 349

mind (do you mind etc) 351 miss 352 need 366

no (no better etc) 57 no doubt 377 no matter 378 nowadays 388 of course
390 often 391 once: adverb 393 only: focusing adverb 398 open 399

opposite (adjective): position 401 own 405 part 407

place (a place to live, etc) 431 please and thank you 433

point of view 434

prefer 444

presently 467

quite 489

rather 490-491

reason 492

remind 499

[the] rest 501

[the] same 503

see 505

see, look (at) and watch 506 seem 507 smell 535 since: tenses 522

so: adverb meaning like this/that' 536

so: degree adverb (so tired, so fast) 538

so (and not) with hope, believe etc 539

so with say and tell 540

so-and-so; so-so 544

sort of, kind of and type of 551

sound 552

still, yet and already: time 566 such 568 suggest 570

suppose, supposing and what if 571

supposed to 572

surely 573

sympathetic 574

take: time 576

taste 577

than: structures 581

the matter (with) 585

there 586

think 588

time 593

tonight 594

too 595

used to 604

[be] used to .. .ing 605

very and very much 611

wait 612

want 613

-wards 614

way 615

well 617

where (to) 619

why and why not 628

wish: tenses 630

worth 632

yes and no 634

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <ul>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-1.xhtml][Language terminology]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-2.xhtml][Don't say it! 130 common mistakes]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <ul>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-3.xhtml][2 before a noun]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <ul>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-4.xhtml][2 be + ... age]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

-  [[#main-5.xhtml][5 not used like an adjective]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-6.xhtml][70 articles (10): special rules and exceptions]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-7.xhtml][87 back and again]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </ul>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-8.xhtml][114 Britain, the United Kingdom, the British Isles and
England]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-9.xhtml][132 close and shut]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-10.xhtml][147 correspondence (2): emails and text messages]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

-  [[#main-11.xhtml][17 gaining time]]
-  [[#main-12.xhtml][3 before pronouns: You ready?]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-13.xhtml][196 expect, hope, wait and look forward]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

-  [[#main-14.xhtml][1 present reality]]
-  [[#main-15.xhtml][5 have got]]
-  [[#main-16.xhtml][5 how much, how many, how old, how far etc]]
-  [[#main-17.xhtml][3 into for change]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-18.xhtml][284 infinitives (6): after adjectives]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

-  [[#main-19.xhtml][2 purpose: a machine for cutting]]
-  [[#main-20.xhtml][3 vocabulary]]
-  [[#main-21.xhtml][2 of after (a) little and (a) few]]
-  [[#main-22.xhtml][2 by all/any/no means]]
-  [[#main-23.xhtml][2 classical names]]
-  [[#main-24.xhtml][4 subjects]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-25.xhtml][393 once: adverb]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <ul>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-26.xhtml][5 participle clauses with their own subjects]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-27.xhtml][4 past focus on continuing situations]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-28.xhtml][2 one's and whose]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-29.xhtml][12 infinitive structures]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-30.xhtml][3 pronunciation of third person singular forms]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-31.xhtml][2 do: Do you like ...?]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-32.xhtml][4 leaving out object pronouns]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-33.xhtml][507 seem]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-34.xhtml][520 should (3): should, ought and must]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-35.xhtml][6 another, a/an + adjective]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-36.xhtml][549 some time, sometime and sometimes]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-37.xhtml][3 be]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-38.xhtml][583 that-clauses]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-39.xhtml][2 common structures]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-40.xhtml][2 not very]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <li>
#+END_HTML

[[#main-41.xhtml][2 I wish you...]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </li>
#+END_HTML

-  [[#main-42.xhtml][drunken 304.3]]
-  [[#main-43.xhtml][nearest, next and the next 375 nearly position
   24.]]
-  [[#main-44.xhtml][taste 577; can taste 125.1; progressive and
   non-pr]]

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </ul>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </ul>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </ul>
#+END_HTML

<<main-1.xhtml>>

<<main-1.xhtml#bookmark0>>Language terminology

The following words and expressions are used in this book to talk about
grammar and other aspects of language.

abstract noun (the opposite of a concrete noun) the name of something
which we experience as an idea, not by seeing, touching etc. Examples:
doubt, height, geography.

active An active verb form is one like breaks, told, will help (not like
is broken, was told, will be helped, which are passive verb forms). The
subject of an active verb is usually the person or thing that does the
action, or that is responsible for what happens, adjective a word like
green, hungry, impossible, which is used when we describe people,
things, events etc. Adjectives are used in connection with nouns and
pronouns. Examples: a green apple, She's hungry. adverb a word like
tomorrow, once, badly, there, also, which is used to say, for example,
when, where or how something happens. There are very many kinds of
adverbs with different functions: see 22-27. adverb particle a short
adverb like up, out, off, often used as part of a phrasal verb (e.g.
clean up, look out, tell off). affirmative an affirmative sentence is
one that makes a positive statement -not a negative sentence or a
question. Compare I agree (affirmative); I don't agree (negative).

agent In a passive sentence, the agent is the expression that says who
or what an action is done by. Example: This picture was probably painted
by a child. article A, an and the are called 'articles'. Alan is called
the ‘indefinite article^{1};

the is called the ‘definite article', aspect Grammarians prefer to talk
about progressive and perfective aspect, rather than progressive and
perfect tense, since these forms express other ideas besides time (e.g.
continuity, completion). However, in this book the term tense is often
used to include aspect, for the sake of simplicity, attributive
Adjectives placed before nouns are in ‘attributive position^{1}.

Examples: a green shirt, my noisy son. See also predicative, auxiliary
verb a verb like be, have, do which is used with another verb to make
tenses, passive forms etc. Examples: She was writing, Where have you put
it? See also modal auxiliary verb, clause a part of a sentence which
contains a subject and a verb, usually joined to the rest of a sentence
by a conjunction. Example: Mary said that she was tired. (The word
clause is also sometimes used for structures containing participles or
infinitives with no subject or conjunction. Example: Not knowing what to
do, I telephoned Robin.) cleft sentence a sentence in which special
emphasis is given to one part (e.g. the subject or the object) by using
a structure with it or what. Examples: It was you that caused the
accident, What I need is a drink. collective noun a singular word for a
group. Examples: family; team. comparative the form of an adjective or
adverb made with -er (e.g. older, faster); also the structure more +
adjective/adverb, used in the same way (e.g. more useful, more
politely).

complement (1) a part of a sentence that gives more information about
the subject (after be, seem and some other verbs), or, in some
structures, about the object. Examples: You're the right person to help;
She looks very kind; They elected him President.

(2) a structure or words needed after a noun, adjective, verb or
preposition to complete its meaning. Examples: the intention to travel;
full of water, try phoning, down the street. compound a compound noun,
verb, adjective, preposition etc is one that is made of two or more
parts. Examples: bus driven get on with; one-eyed. concrete noun (the
opposite of an abstract noun) the name of something which we can
experience by seeing, touching etc. Examples: cloud; petrol; raspberry.

conditional (1) a verb form made by using the auxiliary would (also
should after I and we). Examples: I would run; She would sing, We should
think.

(2) a clause or sentence containing if {or a word with a similar
meaning), and perhaps containing a conditional verb form. Examples: If
you try you'll understand; I should be surprised if she knew; What would
you have done if the train had been late? conjunction a word like and,
but, although, because, when, if which can be used to join clauses
together. Example: I rang because I was worried. consonant for example,
the letters b, c, d,f g and their usual sounds (see phonetic alphabet,
page xxx). See also vowel continuous the same as progressive.

contraction a short form in which a subject and an auxiliary verb, or an
auxiliary verb and the word not, are joined together into one word.
Contractions are also made with non-auxiliary be and have. Examples:
I'm; who've; John'll; can't co-ordinate clause one of two or more main
or subordinate clauses of equal 'value' that are connected. Examples:
Shall I come to your place or would you like to come to mine?; It's
cooler today and there's a bit of a wind; she said that it was late and
that she was tired. See also main clause, subordinate clause.

copular verb the same as link verb.

countable noun a noun like car, dog, idea, which can have a plural form,
and can be used with the indefinite article a/an. See also uncountable
noun, declarative question a question which has the same grammatical
form as a statement. Example: That's your girlfriend? definite article
the.

defining relative see identifying relative, demonstrative this, these,
that, those.

determiner one of a group of words that begin noun phrases. Determiners
include a/an, the, my, this, each, either, several, more, both, all.
direct object see object.

direct speech speech reported 'directly', in the words used by the
original speaker (more or less), without any changes of tense, pronouns
etc. Example: She looked at me and said ^{1}This is my money\ See also
indirect speech, discourse marker a word or expression which shows the
connection between what is being said and the wider context. A discourse
marker may, for example, connect a sentence with what comes before or
after, or it may show the speaker's attitude to what he/she is saying.
Examples: on the other hand; frankly, as a matter of fact.

duration how long something lasts. The preposition for can be used with
an expression of time to indicate duration, ellipsis leaving out words
when their meaning can be understood from the context. Examples: (Ifs a)
Nice day, isn't it?; It was better than I expected (it would be).

emphasis giving special importance to one part of a word or sentence
(for example by pronouncing it more loudly; by writing it in capital
letters; by using do in an affirmative clause; by using special word
order), emphatic pronoun reflexive pronoun (myself, yourself etc) used
to emphasise a noun or pronoun. Examples: I'll tell him myself_{1}1
wouldn't sell this to the king himself. See also reflexive pronoun,
ending something added to the end of a word, e.g. -er, -ing, -ed. first
person see person.

formal the style used when talking politely to strangers, on special
occasions, in some literary writing, in business letters, etc. For
example, commence is a more formal word than start. frequency Adverbs of
frequency say how often something happens. Examples: often; never,
daily; occasionally. fronting moving a part of a clause to the beginning
in order to give it special emphasis. Example: Jack I like, but his wife
I can't stand. full verb see main verb.

future a verb form made with the auxiliary shall/will + infinitive
without to.

Examples; I shall arrive; Will it matter? future perfect a verb form
made with shalUwill + have + past participle.

Example: I will have finished by lunchtime. future progressive (or
future continuous) a verb form made with shall/will + be + .. .ing.
Example: I will be needing the car this evening. gender the use of
different grammatical forms to show the difference between masculine,
feminine and neuter, or between human and nonhuman. Examples: he, she;
it, who; which. gerund the form of a verb ending in -ing, used like a
noun (for example, as the subject or object of a sentence). Examples:
Smoking is bad for you; I hate getting up early. See also present
participle, gradable Pretty, hard or cold are gradable adjectives:
things can be more or less pretty, hard or cold. Adverbs of degree (like
rather, very) can be used with gradable words. Perfect or dead are not
gradable words: we do not usually say that something is more or less
perfect, or very dead. grammar the rules that show how words are
combined, arranged or changed to show certain kinds of meaning,
hypothetical Some words and structures (e.g. modal verbs, if clauses)
are used for hypothetical situations - that is to say, situations which
may not happen, or are imaginary. Example: What would you do if you had
six months free?

identifying (or defining) relative clause a relative clause which
identifies a noun - which tells us which person or thing is being talked
about. Example: There's the woman who tried to steal your cat. (The
relative clause who tried to steal your cat identifies the woman - it
tells us which woman is meant.) See also non-identifying relative
clause, imperative the form of a verb used to give orders, make
suggestions, etc. Examples: Bring me a pen; Have a good holiday.

indefinite article atari. indirect object see object.

indirect speech a structure in which we report what somebody said by
making it part of our own sentence (so that the tenses, word order, and
pronouns and other words may be different from those used by the
original speaker). Compare: He said 'I'm tired' (the original speaker's
words are reported in direct speech) and He said that he was tired (the
original speaker's words are reported in indirect speech), infinitive
the 'base' form of a word (usually with to), used after another verb,
after an adjective or noun, or as the subject or complement of a
sentence. Examples: I want to go home; It's easy to sing; Yve got a plan
to start a business; To err is human, to forgive divine: informal the
style used in ordinary conversation, personal letters etc, when there is
no special reason to speak politely or carefully. I'll is more informal
than I will; get is used mosdy in an informal style; start is a more
informal word than commence.

-ing form the form of a verb ending in -ing. Examples: finding; keeping;

running. See also gerund, present participle, initial at the beginning.
Sometimes is an adverb that can go in initial position in a sentence.
Example: Sometimes I wish I had a different job. intensifying making
stronger, more emphatic. Very and terribly are intensifying adverbs,
interrogative Interrogative structures and words are used for asking
questions. In an interrogative sentence, there is an auxiliary verb (or
nonauxiliary be) before the subject (e.g. Can you swim?; Are you
ready?).

What, who and where are interrogative words, intonation the ‘melody' of
spoken language: the way the musical pitch of the voice rises and falls
to show meaning, sentence structure or mood, intransitive An
intransitive verb is one that cannot have an object or be used in the
passive. Examples: smile, fall; come, go. inversion a structure in which
an auxiliary or other verb comes before its subject. Examples: Never had
she seen such a mess; Here comes John. irregular not following the
normal rules, or not having the usual form. An irregular verb has a past
tense and/or past participle that does not end in -ed (e.g. swam,
taken); children is an irregular plural, link verb (or copular verb) be,
seem, feel and other verbs which link a subject to a complement that
describes it. Examples: My mother is in Jersey; He seems unhappy; This
feels soft. main clause, subordinate clause Some sentences consist of a
main clause and one or more subordinate clauses. A subordinate clause
acts like a part of the main clause (e.g. like a subject, or an object,
or an adverbial). Examples: Where she is doesn't matter (the subordinate
clause Where she is is the subject of the main clause); I told you that
I didn't care (the subordinate clause that I didn't care is the direct
object in the main clause); You'll find friends wherever you go (the
subordinate clause wherever you go acts like an adverb in the main
clause: compare You'll find friends anywhere).

main verb (or full verb) A verb phrase often contains one or more
auxiliary verbs together with a main verb. The main verb is the verb
which expresses the central meaning; auxiliary verbs mostly add
grammatical information (for instance they may show that a verb is
progressive, future, perfect or passive). Examples: is going, will
explain; has arrived, would have been forgotten manner an adverb of
manner describes how something happens. Examples: well; suddenly; fast

mid-position If an adverb is in mid-position in a sentence, it is with
the verb.

Example: I have never been to Africa. misrelated participle (also called
hanging or dangling participle) a participle which appears to have a
subject which is not its own. Example: Looking out of the window, the
mountains appeared very close. (This seems to say that the mountains
were looking out of the window.) The structure is usually avoided in
careful writing because of the danger of misunderstanding, modal
auxiliary verb one of the verbs can, could, may, might, must, will,
shall, would, should, ought modify An adjective is said to 'modify* the
noun it is with: it adds to or defines its meaning. Examples: a fine
day, my new job. An adverb can modify a verb (e.g. run fast), an
adjective (e.g. completely ready) or other words or expressions. In
sports car, the first noun modifies the second, negative a negative
sentence is one in which the word not is used with the verb. Example: I
didn't know. nominal relative clause a relative clause (usually
introduced by what) which acts as the subject, object or complement of a
sentence. Example: I gave him what he needed.

non-affirmative (also called non-assertive) The words some, somebody,
somewhere etc are used most often in affirmative sentences. In other
kinds of sentence they are often replaced by any, anybody, anywhere etc.
Words like any, anybody etc are called ‘non-affirmative' or
non-assertive' forms. Other non-affirmative forms are yet and ever.
non-identifying (or non-defining) relative clause a relative clause
which does not identify the noun it refers to (because we already know
which person or thing is meant). Example: There's Hannah Smith, who
tried to steal my cat (The relative clause, who tried to steal my cat,
does not identify the person -she is already identified by the name
Hannah Smith.) See also identifying relative clause.

noun a word like oil, memory, arm, which can be used with an article.
Nouns are most often the names of people or things. Personal names (e.g.
George) and place names (e.g. Birmingham) are called ‘proper nouns';
they are usually used without articles, noun phrase a group of words
(e.g. article + adjective + noun) which acts as the subject, object or
complement in a clause. Example: the last bus. number the way in which
differences between singular and plural are shown grammatically. The
differences between house and houses, mouse and mice, this and these are
differences of number.

object a noun phrase or pronoun that normally comes after the verb in an
active clause. The direct object most often refers to a person or thing
(or people or things) affected by the action of the verb. In the
sentence Take the dog for a walk, the dog is the direct object. The
indirect object usually refers to a person (or people) who receive(s)
the direct object. In the sentence Ann gave me a watch, the indirect
object is me, and the direct object is a watch. See also subject,
participle see present participle and past participle, participle clause
a clause-like structure which contains a participle, not a verb tense.
Examples: Discouraged by his failure, he resigned from his job; Having a
couple of hours to spare, I went to see a film. passive A passive verb
form is made with be + past participle. Examples: is broken; was told;
will be helped (but not breaks, told, will help, which are active verb
forms). The subject of a passive verb form is usually the person or
thing that is affected by the action of the verb. Compare: They sent
Lucas to prison for five years (active) and Lucas was sent to prison for
five years (passive). See also active, past participle a verb form like
broken, gone, stopped, which can be used to form perfect tenses and
passives, or as an adjective. (The meaning is not necessarily past, in
spite of the name.) past perfect a verb form made with had + past
participle. Examples: I had forgotten; The children had arrived; She had
been working, It had been raining. The first two examples are simple
past perfect; the last two (with had been + .. .mg) are past perfect
progressive (or continuous), past progressive (or continuous) a verb
form made with wasfwere + .. .mg.

Examples: I was going, They were stopping. past simple see simple past.

perfect a verb form made with the auxiliary have + past participle.
Examples: I have forgotten; She had failed; having arrived; to have
finished perfect conditional should/would have + past participle.
Examples: I shouldI would have agreed; He would have known. perfect
infinitive (to) have + past participle. Example: to have arrived. person
the way in which, in grammar, we show the difference between the
person(s) speaking {first person), the person(s) spoken to {second
person), and the person, people or thing(s) spoken about {third person).
The differences between / and you, or between am, are and is, are
differences of person, personal pronouns the words I, me, you, he, him
etc. phrase two or more words that function together as a group.
Examples: dead tired; the silly old woman; would have been repaired; in
the country. phrasal verb a verb form that is made up of two parts: verb
+ adverb particle.

Examples: fill up; run over, take in. plural grammatical form used to
refer to more than one person or thing.

Examples: we; buses; children; are; many, these. See also singular,
possessive a form used to show possession and similar ideas. Examples:
John's; our, mine.

possessive pronoun My, your, his, her etc are possessive pronouns (they
stand for ‘the speaker's', ‘the hearer's', ‘that person's' etc). Mine,
yours, his, hers etc are also possessive pronouns, for the same reason.
My, your etc are used before nouns, so they are not only pronouns, but
also determiners. (They are often called ‘possessive adjectives', but
this is not correct.) Mine, yours etc are used without following nouns.

postmodifier a word that comes after the word which it modifies, e.g.
invited in The people invited all came late. See also premodifier,
predicative Adjectives placed after a verb like be, seem, look are in
predicative position. Examples: The house is enormous; She looks happy.
See also attributive.

prefix a form like ex-, anti- or un-, which can be added to the front of
a word to give an additional or different meaning. Examples: ex-wife,
anti-British, unhappy. See also suffix, premodifier a word that comes
before the word which it modifies, e.g. invited in an invited audience.
See also postmodifier. preparatory subject, preparatory object When the
subject of a sentence is an infinitive or a clause, we usually put it
towards the end of the sentence and use the pronoun it as a preparatory
subject. Example: It is important to get enough sleep. It can also be
used as a preparatory object in certain structures. Example: He made it
clear that he disagreed. There is used as a kind of preparatory subject
in there is... and similar structures. Example: There is somebody at the
door. preposition a word like on, off, of into, normally followed by a
noun or pronoun.

prepositional verb a verb form that is made up of two parts: verb form +
preposition. Examples: insist on; care for; listen to. present
participle the form of a verb ending in -ing, used as an adjective, a
verb or part of a verb. Examples: a crying baby, Opening his newspaper,
he started to read; She was running. (The meaning is not necessarily
present, in spite of the name.) See also gerund, present perfect a verb
form made with have/has + past participle. Examples: / have forgotten;
The children have arrived; I've been working all day, It has been
raining. The first two examples are simple present perfect; the last two
(with have been + .. Ang) are present perfect progressive (or present
perfect continuous).

present progressive (or continuous) a verb form made with amlarefis +

.. .ing. Examples: I am going She is staying for two weeks. present
simple see simple present.

progressive (or continuous) A verb form made with the auxiliary be +..
.ing.

Examples: to be going We were wondering, Til be seeing you. progressive
(or continuous) infinitive a form like to be going, to be waiting.
pronoun a word like it, yourself, their, which is used instead of a more
precise noun or noun phrase (like the cat, Peter's self, the family's).
The word pronoun can also be used for a determiner when this includes
the meaning of a following noun which has been left out. Example: I'll
take these. proper noun or proper name a noun (most often with no
article) which is the name of a particular person, place, organisation
etc. Examples: Andrew, Brazil; the European Union. quantifier a
determiner like many, few, little, several, which is used in a noun
phrase to show how much or how many we are talking about, question tag
an expression like do you? or isn't it?, consisting of an auxiliary verb
(or non-auxiliary be or have) + pronoun subject, put on to the end of a
sentence. Examples: You don't eat meat, do you?; It's a nice day; isn't
it? reflexive pronoun myself, yourself, himself etc. Example: I cut
myself shaving this morning. See also emphatic pronoun.

regular following the normal rules or having the usual form. Hoped is a
regular past tense; cats is a regular plural. See also irregular,
relative clause a clause which modifies a noun, usually introduced by a
relative pronoun like who or which. Example: I like people who like me.

See also identifying relative clause, non-identifying relative clause,
relative pronoun a pronoun used to connect a relative clause to its
noun. Who, whom, whose, which and that can be used as relative pronouns,
and sometimes also when, where and why. Examples: There's the man who
wants to buy my car, This is the room which needs painting, Do you
remember the day when we met?

reply question a question (similar in structure to a question tag) used
to reply to a statement, for instance to express interest. Example: I've
been invited to spend the weekend in London.*Have you, dear? second
person see person.

sentence a group of words that expresses a statement, command, question
or exclamation. A sentence consists of one or more clauses, and usually
has at least one subject and verb. In writing, it begins with a capital
letter and ends with a full stop, question mark or exclamation mark,
short answer an answer consisting of a subject and an auxiliary verb (or
nonauxiliary be or have). Examples: Has anybody phoned the police?* John
has.; Who's ready for more?* I am. simple past (or past simple) a past
verb form that has no auxiliary verb in the affirmative. Examples: I
stopped; You heard; We knew. simple present (or present simple) a
present verb form that has no auxiliary verb in the affirmative.
Examples: He goes there often; I know; I like chocolate. simple a verb
form that is not progressive.

singular a grammatical form used to talk about one person, thing, etc,
or about an uncountable quantity or mass. Examples: me; bus; water; is;
much; this. See also plural, slang a word, expression or special use of
language found mainly in very informal speech, often in the usage of
particular groups of people. Examples: thick (= stupid); lose one's cool
(= get upset); sparks (= electrician), split infinitive a structure in
which an adverb comes between to and the rest of the infinitive.
Example: to easily understand. Some people consider split infinitives
'incorrect', but they are common in standard usage, standard A standard
form of a language is the one that is most generally accepted for use in
government, the law, business, education and literature. I'm not is
standard English; I ain't is non-standard, statement a sentence which
gives information; not a question. Examples: I'm cold; Philip didn't
come home last night. stress the way in which one or more parts of a
word, phrase or sentence are made to sound more important than the rest,
by using a louder voice and/or higher pitch. In the word particular, the
main stress is on the second syllable (parrlcular); in the sentence
Where's the new secretary? there are three stresses (WHERE'S the NEW
SEcretary?). strong form, weak form Certain words can be pronounced in
two ways: slowly and carefully with the vowel that is written (strong
form), or with a quicker pronunciation with the vowel /a/ or /i/ (weak
form). Examples: can (/kaen/, /kan/), was (/wdz/, /waz/), for (/fo:(r)/,
/fa(r)/).

subject a noun phrase or pronoun that normally comes before the verb in
an affirmative clause. It often says (in an active clause) who or what
does the action that the verb refers to. Examples: Helen gave me a
wonderful smile; Oil floats on water. See also object, subjunctive a
verb form (not very common in British English) used in certain
structures. Examples: If I were you ...; It's important that he be
informed immediately; We prefer that he pay in cash. subordinate clause
a clause which functions as part of another clause, for example as
subject, object or adverbial in the main clause of a sentence. Examples:
I thought that you understood; What I need is a drink; I'll follow you
wherever you go. See also clause, main clause, suffix a form like
-ology, -able or -ese, which can be added to the end of a word to give
an additional or different meaning. Examples: climatology;
understandable; Chinese. See also prefix, superlative the form of an
adjective or adverb made with the suffix -est (e.g. oldest, fastest);
also the structure most + adjective/adverb, used in the same way (e.g.
most intelligent, most politely). swearword a taboo word used (usually
with a change of meaning) to express strong emotion or emphasis.
Example: Fuck! syllable The word cat has one syllable, cattle has two,
cataract has three and category has four. A syllable normally has a
vowel, and usually one or more consonants before and/or after it.
Sometimes the consonant sounds /, m and n can act as syllables (for
instance in the words bottle /'bntl/, capitalism /'ksepitalizm/, button
/‘bAtn/). taboo word a word (e.g. fuck) connected with a subject (such
as sex) which is not talked about freely, so that some of its vocabulary
is considered shocking. Taboo words are not used in formal speech or
writing, and are avoided altogether by many people. See also swearword,
tag a short phrase (e.g. pronoun subject + auxiliary verb) added on to
the end of a sentence, especially in speech. Examples: He likes to talk,
John does; You can't swim, can you?; Very noisy, those kids. See also
question tag. tense a verb form that shows the time of an action, event
or state. Examples: will go; is sitting; saw. third person see person.

transitive a transitive verb is one that can have an object. Examples:
eat (a meal); drive (a car); give (a present). See also intransitive,
uncountable noun a noun which has no plural form and cannot normally be
used with the article a/an. Examples: mud; rudeness; furniture. verb a
word like ask, wake, play, be, can, which can be used with a subject to
form the basis of a clause. In clauses, verbs often consist of an
auxiliary verb + infinitive or participle (e.g. will go; has spoken).
Most verbs refer to actions, events or states. See also auxiliary verb,
modal auxiliary verb, verb phrase, verb phrase a verb that has more than
one part. Example: would have been forgotten.

vowel the letters a, e, i, o_{}} u and their combinations, and their
usual sounds (see phonetic alphabet, page xxx). See also consonant, weak
form see strong form.

<<main-2.xhtml>>

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark0>>Don't say it! 130 common mistakes

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark1>>35 basic mistakes to avoid. Check in the
sections to see why they're wrong.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

don't say/write

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

say/write see section

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Look - it rains.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Look - it's raining

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

461-464

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's often raining here.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It often rains here.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

461-464

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

When I was 20 I was smoking.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

When I was 20 I smoked.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

422

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I have seen Louis yesterday.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I saw Louis yesterday.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

456

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We're living here sinee April.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We've been living here since April.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

460

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll phone you when I will arrive.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll phone you when I arrive.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

212

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'm not believing him.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I don't believe him.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

471

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I am bom in Chicago.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I was bom in Chicago.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

108

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

My sister has 15 years.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

My sister is 15 (years old).

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

32

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I have cold in this house.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I am cold in this house.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

92

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I can to swim.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I can swim.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

121

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I must see the dentist yesterday.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I had to see the dentist yesterday.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

358

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I want go home.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I want to go home.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

613

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I came here for study English.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I came here to study English.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

289

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I drove there without to stop.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I drove there without stopping.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

298

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Where I can buy stamps?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Where can I buy stamps?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

480

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Is ready my new office?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Is my new office ready?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

480

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'm no asleep.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'm not asleep.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

382

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

She looked, but she didn't see

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... she didn't see anything. /

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

370

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nothing.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... she saw nothing.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Where is station?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Where is the station?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

62

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

My sister is photographer.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

My sister is a photographer.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

62

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

You speak a very good English.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

You speak very good English.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

149

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The life is difficult

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Life is difficult.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

68

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I haven't got some free time

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I haven't got any free time today.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

547

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

today.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Everybody were late.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Everybody was late.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

548

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It is more cold today.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It is colder today.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

137

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's too much hot in this house.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's too hot in this house.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

595

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The man which lives here is

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The man who lives here is

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

494

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

from Greece.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

from Greece.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The people in this town is

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The people in this town are

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

524

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

very friendly.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

very friendly.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

She never listens me.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

She never listens to me.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

449

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We went at the seaside on

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We went to the seaside on

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

80

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Sunday.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Sunday.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I like very much skiing.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I very much like skiing. /1 like

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

611

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

skiing very much.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

This soup isn't enough hot.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

This soup isn't hot enough.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

187

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I gave to her my address.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I gave her my address.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

610

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I have done a mistake.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I have made a mistake.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

160

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

don't say/write

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

say/write see section

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I promise I pay you tomorrow.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I promise I'll pay you tomorrow.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

217

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

This is the first time I'm here.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... the first time I've been here.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

591

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I've been here since three days.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... for three days.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

208

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

If I'll have time, I'll go home.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

If I have time,...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

257

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

If I knew the price, I will tell you.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... I would tell you.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

258

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He said me that he was Chinese.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He told me that he was Chinese.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

504

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

She told me she has a headache.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

She told me she had a headache.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

275

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

There's the man that I work for

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

There's the man that I work for.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

494

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

him.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I've told you all what I know.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... all (that) I know.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

494

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Although it was late, but she

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Although it was late, she went

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

511

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

went out

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

out.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

You have better to see the doctor.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

You had better see the doctor.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

230

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I use to play tennis at weekends.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I play tennis at weekends.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

604

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It can rain this evening.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It may/might/could rain ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

345

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

My parents wanted that I study.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

My parents wanted me to study.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

283

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

You must stop to smoke.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... stop smoking.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

299

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I look forward to see you.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I look forward to seeing you.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

298

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'm boring in the lessons.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'm bored in the lessons.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

409

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He has much money.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He has a lot of / plenty of money.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

357

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Most of people agree with me.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Most people ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

356

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I looked at me in the mirror.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I looked at myself...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

493

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We waited during six hours.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... for six hours.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

167

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I like eating chocolate milk.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... milk chocolate.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

385

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Come here and look at that paper.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Come here and look at this paper.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

589

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We go there every Saturdays.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... every Saturday.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

193

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Which is the biggest city of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... the biggest city in the world?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

139

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the world?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'm thinking to change my job.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'm thinking of changing my job.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

588

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Can you give me an information?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... some information?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

148

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He's married with a doctor.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He's married to a doctor.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

449

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Can you mend this .until Tuesday?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... by Tuesday?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

602

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

There's a hotel in front of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... opposite our house.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

402

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

our house.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I like warm countries, as Spain.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... warm countries, like Spain.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

326

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Please explain me what you want.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... explain to me ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

198

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

When you come, take your bike.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... bring your bike.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

112

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

My brother has got a new work.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... a new job.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

148

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He's Dutch, or better Belgian.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

He's Dutch, or rather Belgian.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

157

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

don't say/write

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

say/write see section

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll ask you in case I need help.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll ask you if I need help.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

271

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I object to tell them my age.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I object to telling them my age.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

298

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I like the 60s music.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

I like 60s music. / the music of the 60s. 69

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ten thousand, a hundred and six

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ten thousand, one hundred...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

389

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

^{r}Who^{,}s that?' ~ ‘He's John.'

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... ‘It's John.'

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

428

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I don't like to be shouted.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I don't like to be shouted at.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

416

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's ages since she's arrived.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's ages since she arrived.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

522

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The police is looking for him.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The police are looking ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

524

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Prices are surely rising fast.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Prices are certainly rising fast.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

573

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I have big respect for her ideas.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... great respect...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

106

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I don't like nowadays fashions.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... today's/modem fashions.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

388

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

She passed her exam, what

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... which surprised everybody.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

494

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

surprised everybody.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I've good knowledge of German.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... a good knowledge of German.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

149

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Finally! Where have you been?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

At last!...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

204

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll be home since 3 o' clock.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... from 3 o' clock.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

308

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We waited one and a half hour.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... one and a half hours.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

231

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's time they go home.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's time they went home.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

306

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll see you a few days later.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... in a few days.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

315

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

All along the centuries, there

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

All through the centuries ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

45

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

have been wars.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I want a completely other colour.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... a completely different colour.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

54

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Let's go and have coffee

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... at Marcel's.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

80

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

to Marcel's.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

That's mine -1 saw it at first!

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... I saw it first^{1}

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

84

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Switzerland is among Germany,

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... between Germany, France,

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

105

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

France, Austria and Italy.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Austria and Italy.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

According to me, it's a bad film.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

In my opinion / I think...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

8

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It was a too good party to miss.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... too good a party...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

14

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Whole Paris was celebrating.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The whole of Paris ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

40

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I nearly wish I'd stayed at home.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I almost wish ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

43

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

One speaks Italian in my town.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

We/They speak...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

396

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The girl wants an own room.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... her own room.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

405

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Couldn't you help me, please?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Could you...? / You couldn't..., could you?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

368

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll try to know when it starts.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I'll try to find out when it starts.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

313

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

I love this so beautiful country.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... this country - it's so beautiful.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

538

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's getting winter.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

It's getting to be winter.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

223

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Our flat is decorated this week.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

... is being decorated ..

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

412

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The Mont Blanc is 4808m high.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Mont Blanc is...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

70

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark2>>Even very advanced students can make mistakes
- nobody's perfect! Here are 25. Do you know why they're wrong? Check in
the sections.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark3>>don't say/write

No doubt the world is getting warmer.

I can't think of anybody whom to invite.

My father, whom we hope will be out of hospital soon,...

Would you follow me wherever I would go?

We all have to live in the society.

The number of the unemployed is going up.

She was showing tiredness signs.

She works the hardest when she's working for her family.

I'm thankful for your help.

We talked about if it was ready.

What live in those litde holes?

Some people are interested, but the majority doesn't care.

It mustn't be the postman at the door. It's only 7 o' clock.

A third of the students is from abroad.

ExceptAngie, everybody was there.

I wish you felt / would feel better tomorrow.

The train may be late, as it happened yesterday.

When I wrote my letters, I did some gardening.

When I had opened the door, the children ran in.

Stefan can never return back to his country.

Will you go and see me when I'm in hospital?

May you go camping this summer?

My cousin works for the NATO.

My wife will be angry unless I'm home by 7.00.

We were poured water on.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark4>>say/write    see section

There is no doubt that the    377 world is getting warmer.

We had water poured on us. /    416 Water was poured on us.

i:    seat /si:t/, feel /firl/

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark5>>Phonetic alphabet

It is necessary to use a special alphabet to show the pronunciation of
English words, because the ordinary English alphabet does not have
enough letters to represent all the sounds of the language. The
following list contains all the letters of the phonetic alphabet used in
this book, with examples of the words in which the sounds they refer to
are found.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark6>>Vowels and diphthongs (double vowels)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

i    sit /sit/, in /m/

e    set /set/, any /'eni:/

as    sat /saet/, match /maetJV

a:    march /maitJV, after /‘aifte(r)/

d    pot /put/, gone /gDn/

o:    port /port/, law /lo:/

u    good /god/, could /kud/

u:    food /fu:d/, group /grurp/

a    much /mAtjy, front /frAnt/

3:    turn /t3m/, word /W3:d/

a    away /a'wei/, collect /kalekt/, until /an‘til/

ei    take /teik/, wait /weit/

ai    mine /main/, light /lait/

01    oil /oil/, boy fboi/

au    no /nau/, open /'aupan/

au    house /haus/, now /nau/

18    hear /hia(r)/, deer /dia(r)/

ee    air /ea(r)/, where /wea(r)/

ua    tour /tua(r)/, endure /m‘djua(r)/

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark7>>Consonants

| p   | pull /pul/, cup /kAp/                       | 11   | cheap /tjup/, catch /kastj/           |
| b   | bull /bul/, rob /rob/                       | d3   | jail /d3eil/, bridge /brid3/          |
| f   | ferry /Teri:/, life /laif/                  | k    | case /keis/, take /teik/              |
| v   | veri /'veri:/, live /liv/                   | g    | go /gau/, rug /rAg/                   |
| 0   | think /0n]k/, bath /ba:0/                   | m    | my /mai/, come /kAm/                  |
| 5   | then /6en/, with /wid/                      | n    | no /nau/, on /t>n/                    |
| t   | take /teik/, set /set/                      | rt   | sing /sirj/, finger /^{#}fii]ga(r)/   |
| d   | day /dei/, red /red/                        | 1    | love /1av/, hole /haul/               |
| s   | sing /sig/, rice /rais/                     | r    | round /raund/, carry /'kaeri:/        |
| z   | zoo /zu:/, days /deiz/                      | w    | well /wel/                            |
| s   | show /Jau/, wish /wij/                      | j    | young/jAo/                            |
| 3   | pleasure /*ple38(r)/, occasion /a'kei38n/   | h    | house/haus/                           |

The sign (') shows stress (see 554).

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark8>>1 abbreviated styles

Some styles of writing and speech have their own special grammar rules,
often because of the need to save space or time.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark9>>1    advertisements and instructions

Small ads and instructions often leave out articles, subject or object
pronouns, forms of be and prepositions.

Single man looking for flat Oxford area. Phone 806127 weekends.

Job needed urgently. Will do anything legal. Call 312654.

Pour mixture into large saucepan, heat until boiling, then add three
pounds sugar and leave on low heat for 45 minutes.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark10>>2    notes

Informal notes, to-do lists, diary entries etc often follow similar
rules.

Gone to hairdresser. Back 12.30.

Book tickets phone Ann see Joe 11.00 meeting Sue lunch The same style is
common in postcards, short informal letters and emails (see 147).

Dear Gran

Watching tennis on TV. A good book. Three meals a day. No washing-up.
Clean sheets every day. Everything done for me. Yes, you've guessed - in
hospital!!

Only went to doctor for cold - landed up in hospital with pneumonia!! If
you have time please tell the others - would love some letters to cheer
me up. Hope to see you.

Love, Pam

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark11>>3    commentaries

Commentaries on fast-moving events like football matches also have their
own kind of grammar. Auxiliaries and other less important verbs are
often left out. Goal kick... And the score still Spurs 3, Arsenal 1...
that's Pearce... Pearce to Coates... good ball... Sawyer running wide...
Billings takes it, through to Matthews, Matthews with a cross, oh, and
Billings in beautifully, a good chance there - and it's a goal!

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark12>>4    titles, notices etc

Tides, labels, headings, notices and slogans usually consist of short
phrases, not complete sentences. Articles are often left out, especially
in the names of buildings and institutions.

ROYAL HOTEL INFORMATION OFFICE MORE MONEY FOR NURSES!

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark13>>5    headlines

News headlines have their own special grammar and vocabulary. For
details, see 240.

RECORD DRUGS HAUL AT AIRPORT: SIX HELD FOUR DIE IN M6 BLAZE

For other rules about leaving words out ('ellipsis'), see 177-182.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark14>>2 abbreviations and acronyms

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark15>>1    punctuation

We usually write abbreviations without full stops in modem British
English. Full stops (AmE ‘periods') are normal in American English.

Mr (AmE Mr) = Mister (not usually written in full) kg (AmE kg.) =
kilogram Ltd = limited (company)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark16>>2    initial-letter abbreviations

Some abbreviations are made from the first letters of several words.
This often happens with the names of organisations.

the BBC = the British Broadcasting Corporation These abbreviations are
most often stressed on the last letter.

the BBC /5a bii bi: 'si:/ the USA /5a ju: es ‘ei/

If one of these abbreviations has an article {a/an or the), the form and
pronunciation of the article depend on the pronunciation of the first
letter of the abbreviation. Compare:

-    an EU country

a US diplomat /a ju: .../ (not an US ...)

-    a BA degree

an MP /an em .../ (not a MP)

-    the USA /5a ju:.../ (not /5i: ju:.../) the RSPCA /5i: a:r .../ (not
/5e air .../)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark17>>3    acronyms

Some initial-letter abbreviations are pronounced like words. These are
often called acronyms. Articles are usually dropped in acronyms.

UNESCO /ju:‘neskau/ (not the UNESCO) = the United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organisation Note that not all initial-letter
abbreviations are pronounced as words. the CIA I si: ai *ei/ (not
/\^fe/) the IRA /si a:r ‘ei/ (not/\^h^{1}©/)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark18>>4    plurals

An apostrophe O is sometimes used before the s in the plurals of
abbreviations.

MP's, CD's or (more often) MPs, CDs.

For abbreviations used in text messages (e.g. hope 2 c u for hope to see
you), see 147.

For a list of common abbreviations, see a good dictionary.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark19>>3 [be] able

We use able especially in the structure be able + infinitive. This often
has the same meaning as can (see 122). There is a negative form unable.

Some people are able to / can walk on their hands I am unable to / can't
understand what she wants.

Can is preferred in the sense of ‘know how to', and in expressions like
can see, can hear etc (see 125).

Can you knit? (More natural than Are you able to knit?)

above and over 6

I can see a ship. (More natural than I am able to see a ship.)

Be able is used in cases (e.g. future, present perfect) where can!could
is not grammatically possible because it has no infinitive or
participles (see 121.1d). One day scientists will be able to find a cure
for cancer.

(not ... willean find...)

What have you been able to find out? (not What have you could...?)

I might be able to help you. (not I might can ...)

Able is not often followed by passive infinitives.

He can't be understood. (More natural than He^{f}s not able to be
understood.) For differences between could and was able, see 122.5,
123.2.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark20>>4    about and on

Compare:

-    a book for children about Africa and its peoples a textbook on
African history

-    a conversation about money a lecture on economics

We use about to talk about ordinary, more general kinds of
communication. On suggests that a book, talk etc is more serious,
suitable for specialists.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark21>>5    about to

About + infinitive (with to) means ‘going to very soon'; 'just going
to'.

Don't go out now - we're about to have lunch.

I was about to go to bed when the telephone rang.

Not about to can mean 'unwilling to'.

I'm not about to pay 100 dollars for that dress.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark22>>6    above and over

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark23>>1    'higher than': above or over

Above and over can both mean 'higher than'. Above is more common with
this meaning.

The water came up above/over our knees.

Can you see the helicopter abovelover the palace?

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark24>>2    'not directly over*: above

We use above when one thing is not directly over another.

We've got a little house above the lake, (not ... over-the lake.)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark25>>3    'covering': over

We prefer over when one thing covers and/or touches another.

There is cloud over the South of England He put on a coat over his
pyjamas.

We use over or across (see 9) when one thing crosses another.

The plane was flying over/across Denmark.

Electricity cables stretch over/across the fields.    »

accept and agree 7

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark26>>4    measurements: above

Above is used in measurements of temperature and height, and in other
cases where we think of a vertical scale.

The temperature is three degrees above zero.

The summit of Everest is about 8000 metres above sea level.

She's well above average in intelligence.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark27>>5    ages, speeds, 'more than': over

We usually use over, not above, to talk about ages and speeds, and to
mean ‘more than'.

You have to be over 18 to see this film.

The police said she was driving at over 110 mph.

There were over 100,000 people at the festival.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark28>>6    books and papers

In a book or paper, above means ‘written before'.

The above rides and regulations apply to all students.

For prices and delivery charges, see above.

See over means ‘look on the next page'.

There are cheap flights at weekends: see over.

The difference between below and under is similar. See 100.

For other meanings of these words, see a good dictionary.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark29>>7    accept and agree

Before an infinitive, we usually use agree, not accept

I agreed to meet them here. (More normal than I accepted to meet...)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark30>>8    according to

According to X means ‘in X's opinion', ‘if what X says is true*.

According to Harry, it's a good film.

The train gets in at 8.27, according to the timetable.

We do not usually give our own opinions with according to. Compare:
According to Ann, her boyfriend is brilliant.

(= If what Ann says is true, ...)

In my opinion, Ann's boyfriend is an idiot, (not According to me,...)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark31>>9    across, over and through

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark32>>1 on/to the other side of (line): across and
over

Across and over can both be used to mean ‘on or to the other side of a
line, river, road, bridge etc'.

His village is just across/over the border.

See if you can jump across/over the stream.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark33>>2    high things: over preferred

We prefer over to say ‘on/to the other side of something high'.

Why are you climbing over the wall? (not .. . across the wall?)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark34>>3    flat areas: across preferred

We usually prefer across to say ‘on/to the other side of a flat area or
surface*. He walked right across the desert.

It took them six hours to row across the lake.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark35>>4    the adverb over (to)

Note that the adverb over has a wider meaning than the preposition over.
We often use over (to) for short journeys.

Vm going over to John's. Shall we drive over and see your mother?

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark36>>5    across and through

The difference between across and through is like the difference between
on and in. Through, unlike across, is used for a movement in a
three-dimensional space, with things on all sides. Compare:

-    We walked across the ice. (We were on the ice.)

I walked through the wood. (1 was in the wood.)

-    We drove across the desert.

We drove through several towns.

For over and above, see 6.

For across from (AmE), see 402.1.

For other uses of these words, see a good dictionary.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark37>>10 active verb forms

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark38>>1    future, present and past; simple,
progressive and perfect

English verbs can refer to future, present or past time, future: She
will see you tomorrow. present: I'm watching you. past: Who said that?

For each kind of time, there are three possibilities with most verbs:
simple, progressive {be + -ing) and perfect (have + past participle),
simple present: I start present progressive: I am starting present
perfect: I have started

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark39>>2    verb forms ('tenses') and time

There is not a direct relationship between verb forms and time. For
example, a past verb like went is not only used to talk about past
events (e.g. We went to Morocco last January), but also about unreal or
uncertain present or future events (e.g. It would be better if we went
home now). And present verbs can be used to talk about the future (e.g.
Vm seeing Peter tomorrow). Also, progressive and perfect forms express
ideas that are not simply concerned with time - for example
continuation, completion, present importance.    ►

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark40>>3    progressive forms

Progressive (or 'continuous') forms are used especially when we describe
an event as going on or continuing (perhaps at a particular time, or up
to a particular time). See 470-472 for more details.

I can't talk to you now; Vm working.

When you phoned I was working in the garage.

I was tired because I had been working all day.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark41>>4    perfect forms

Perfect forms are used, for example, when we want to suggest a
connection between a past event and the present, or between an earlier
and a later past event; or when we want to say that something
is/was/will be completed by a particular time. See 427 for more details.

I have worked with children before, so I know what to expect in my new
job. After I had worked with Jake for a few weeks, I felt I knew him
pretty well. I will have worked 10 hours by suppertime.

Perfect progressive forms are also possible.

I've been working all day.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark42>>5    table of active verb forms

This is a list of all the active affirmative forms of an ordinary
English verb, with their names, examples, and very brief descriptions of
typical uses. For more information about the forms and their uses, see
the entries for each one.

| NAME                         | CONSTRUCTION                                                                                  | EXAMPLE                                                | TYPICAL USE                                                  |
| (simple)                     | will + infinitive                                                                             | It wiU rain tomorrow.                                  | information about the future (see 212)                       |
|                              |                                                                                               |                                                        |                                                              |
| future                       | I/we shall also possible                                                                      |                                                        |                                                              |
| future                       | will be... ing                                                                                | This time tomorrow I'll be lying on the beach.         | continuing situation at a particular future time (see 220)   |
|                              |                                                                                               |                                                        |                                                              |
| progressive                  | I/we shall also possible                                                                      |                                                        |                                                              |
| future                       | will have + past participle I/we shall also possible                                          | I will have finished the repairs by this evening.      | completion by a particular future time (see 219)             |
|                              |                                                                                               |                                                        |                                                              |
| perfect                      |                                                                                               |                                                        |                                                              |
| future perfect progressive   | will have been.. .ing I/we shall also possible                                                | In June I will have been working here for ten years.   | continuity up to a particular future time (see 219)          |
| simple                       | same as infinitive, but -s on third person singular (e.g. I/you/we/they work; he/she works)   | It always rains in November.                           | ‘general' time; permanent situations (see 463)               |
|                              |                                                                                               |                                                        |                                                              |
| present                      |                                                                                               |                                                        |                                                              |

| NAME                          | CONSTRUCTION                                                       | EXAMPLE                                                         | TYPICAL USE                                              |
| present                       | amiare/is .. .ing                                                  | I can't talk to you now; Vm working                             | actions continuing at the moment of speaking (see 464)   |
|                               |                                                                    |                                                                 |                                                          |
| progressive                   |                                                                    |                                                                 |                                                          |
| present                       | have/has + past participle                                         | 1 have worked with children before, so I know what to expect.   | past action with some present connection (see 455)       |
|                               |                                                                    |                                                                 |                                                          |
| perfect                       |                                                                    |                                                                 |                                                          |
| present perfect progressive   | have!has been.. .ing                                               | It has been raining all day.                                    | continuation up to the present (see 458)                 |
| simple past                   | regular verbs: infinitive + -(e)d irregular verbs: various forms   | I worked all last weekend. I saw John yesterday.                | past events (see 421)                                    |
| past                          | was!were .. .ing                                                   | I saw John when I was coming out of the                         | action continuing at a particular past time (see 422)    |
|                               |                                                                    |                                                                 |                                                          |
| progressive                   |                                                                    | supermarket.                                                    |                                                          |
| past perfect                  | had + past participle                                              | I couldn't get in because I had lost my keys.                   | action before a particular past time (see 423)           |
| past perfect progressive      | had been .. .ing                                                   | I was tired because I had been working all day.                 | continuation up to a particular past time (see 425)      |

For irregular past tenses and past participles, see 304.

For question forms, see 480. For negatives, see 367.

For the use of present forms to talk about the future, see 213-216.

For past verbs with present or future meanings, see 426.

For 'conditional' forms (would + Infinitive), see 633 and 258-259.

For subjunctives (e.g\_\_\_\_that she go), see 567.

For passive verb forms, see 412.

For infinitives, see 280. For imperatives, see 268.

For 'ing forms, see 293. For auxiliary verbs, see 85.

For verb forms constructed with modal auxiliary verbs, see 353.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark43>>actual(ly)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark44>>meaning and use

Actual means ‘real*; actually means 'really* or ‘in fact*.

They are used to make things clearer, more precise or more definite.

It's over 100 kilos. Let me look. Yes, the actual weight is 108 kilos.

Vve got a new job. Actually_{f} they've made me sales manager.

Did you enjoy your holiday? * Very much, actually.

Actual and actually often introduce surprising or unexpected
information.

It takes me an hour to drive to work, although the actual distance is
only 20 miles.    ►

She was so angry that she actually tore up the letter.

How did you get on with my car?* Well, actually, Vm terribly sorry, I'm
afraid I had a crash.

He's twelve, but he actually still believes in Father Christmas.

They can be used to correct mistakes or misunderstandings.

The book says she died aged 47, but her actual age was 43.

Hello, John. Nice to see you. * Actually, my name's Andy.

Actually is more common in British than American English.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark45>>2 'false friends'

Actual and actually are ‘false friends* for people who speak some
languages. They do not mean the same as, for example, actuel(lement),
aktuell, or attual(ment)e. We express these ideas with present, current,
up to date; at this moment, now, at present.

What's our current financial position?

(not ... our actual financial position?)

In 1900 the population of London was higher than it is now.

(not ... than it actually is.)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark46>>12 adjectives (1): normal position

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    two positions

Most adjectives can go in two main places in a sentence.

a with a noun, usually before it. This is called ‘attributive position*.

The new secretary doesn't like me.

He's going out with a rich businesswoman.

In older English (see 392), it was quite common to put adjectives after
nouns, especially in poetry and songs.

He came from his palace grand.

In modern English, this only happens in a few cases (see 13).

For adjectives before personal pronouns (e.g. Poor you!), see 429.7.

b after be, seem, look, become and other ‘link verbs* (see 328). This is
called ‘predicative position*.

That dress is new, isn't it?

She looks rich. I feel unhappy.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    adjectives used only before nouns

Some adjectives are used only (or mostly) before nouns. After verbs,
other words must be used. Common examples:

elder and eldest Compare:

My elder sister is a pilot. She's three years older than me. live /larv/
(meaning ‘not dead*) Compare: a live fish It's still alive, old
(referring to relationships that have lasted a long time) an old friend
(not the same as a friend who is old) little (see 534) Compare:

a nice little house The house is quite small intensifying (emphasising)
adjectives

He's a mere child. (but not That child-h-mere.)

It's sheer madness, (but not That- madness is sheer.)

You bloody fool! (but not That-foohis-bloody.)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark49>>3    adjectives used only after verbs

Some adjectives beginning with a-, and a few others, are used mainly
after link verbs, especially be. Common examples: afloat, afraid,
alight, alike, alive, alone, asleep, awake. Compare:

-    The baby's asleep.    - He was afraid.

a sleeping baby (not an asleep-baby) a frightened man

-    77ze ship's still afloat, a floating leaf

The adjectives ill (see 266) and well (see 617) are most common after
verbs. Before nouns, many people prefer other words. Compare:

-    He's very well    - You look ill

a healthy/fit man Nurses take care of sick people.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark50>>4    verb + object + adjective

Another possible position for adjectives is after the object, in the
structure verb + object + adjective.

I'll get the car ready.

Do I make you happy? Let's paint the kitchen yellow.

For the order of adjectives and other modifiers before nouns, see 15.

For and between adjectives, see 16.

For commas between adjectives, see 15.6.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark51>>13 adjectives (2): after nouns and pronouns

Adjectives come immediately after nouns in a few special cases.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark52>>1 fixed phrases

Adjectives come after nouns in some fixed phrases.

Secretary General

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

President elect God AlmightyI Attorney General

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

court martial (= military court)

Poet Laureate

The Secretary General of the United Nations has called for new peace
talks.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark53>>2 available, possible etc.

Some adjectives can be used after nouns in a similar way to relative
clauses. This is common with adjectives ending in -able/-ible.

Send all the tickets available / available tickets.

(= ... tickets which are available.)

It's the only solution possible / possible solution.

Some adverbs can also be used like this.

the woman upstairs the people outside    »

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark54>>3    present, proper

Before a noun, present refers to time; after a noun it means
‘here/there', 'not absent*. Compare:

the present members (= those who are members now) the members present (=
those who are/were at the meeting)

Before a noun, proper means ‘real', ‘genuine'. After a noun it refers to
the central or main part of something. Compare:

Snowdon's a proper mountain, not a hill

After two days crossing the foothills, they reached the mountain proper.

For the position and meaning of opposite, see 401.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark55>>4    expressions of measurement

Adjectives usually follow measurement nouns.

two metres high ten years older two miles long six feet deep Exception:
worth (e.g. worth 100 euros). See 632.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark56>>5    adjectives with complements

When an adjective has its own complement (e.g. skilled in design), the
whole expression normally comes after a noun..

We are looking for people skilled in design, (not ..
.-skiUed-in-designrpeople:) A relative clause is often more natural.

We are looking for people who are skilled in design.

In some cases an adjective can be put before a noun and its complement
after it. This happens with different, similar, the same, next, last,
first, second etc; comparatives and superlatives; and a few other
adjectives like difficult and easy, a different life from this one
   the second train from this platform

the next house to the Royal Hotel the best mother in the world (or the
house next to the Royal Hotel) a difficult problem to solve

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark57>>6    something, everything etc

Adjectives come after something, everything, anything, nothing,
somebody, anywhere and similar words.

Have you read anything interesting lately?

Let's go somewhere quiet

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark58>>14 adjectives (3): position after as, how,
so, too

After as, how, so, too and thisfthat meaning so, adjectives go before
a/an. This structure is common in a formed style.

as/how/so/too/this/that + adjective + a/an + noun

I have as good a voice as you. She is too polite a person to refuse.

How good a pianist is he? I couldn't afford that big a car.

It was so warm a day that I could hardly work.

The structure is not possible without a/an.

I like your country - it's so beautiful (not / like your so beautiful
country.) Those girls are too kind to refuse, (not They are too kind
girls to refuse.)

For the structure with adjective + as in expressions like tired as /
was.... see 71.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark59>>15 adjectives (4): order before nouns

When several adjectives come before a noun (or when nouns are used like
adjectives before another noun), they are usually put in a more or less
fixed order. For instance, we say a fat old lady, not an old fat lady; a
small round black leather handbag, not et-feather blaek-round-small
handbag. Here are the most important rules.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark60>>1    description before classification: an
old political idea

Words which describe come before words which classify (say what type of
thing we are talking about).

description    classification    noun

an old    political    idea (not a political old idea)

the latest    educational    reform (not the educational latest reform)

a green    wine    bottle (not a wine-green-bottle)

leather    dancing    shoes (not dancing leather shoes)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark61>>2    opinion before description: a wonderful
old house

Words which express opinions, attitudes and judgements usually come
before words that simply describe. Examples are lovely, definite_{t}
pure, absolute, extreme, perfect, wonderful silly.

opinion    description    noun

a lovely    cool    drink (not a cool lovely drink)

a wonderful    old    house (not tm-old-wonderful house)

beautiful    green    mountains (not green-beautiful mountains)

that silly    fat    cat    (not that-fat-sUfy-eat)

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark62>>3    order of descriptive words

The order of descriptive words is not completely fixed. Words for origin
and material usually come last. Words for size, age, shape and colour
often come in that order.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

size

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

age

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

shape

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

colour

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

origin

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

material

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

noun

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

fat

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

old

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

white

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

horse

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

big

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

new

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

grey

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Italian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

woollen

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

sweater

boots

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

small

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

round

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

black

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

leather

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

handbag

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

an

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

enormous

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

brown

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

German

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

glass

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mug

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

little

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

modern

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

square

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

brick

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

house

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark63>>4 numbers

Numbers usually go before adjectives.

six large eggs the second big shock First, next and last most often go
before one, two, three etc. the first three days (More common than the
three first days) my last two jobs    ►

adjectives (5): with and 16

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark64>>5    noun modifiers after adjectives

Note that noun modifiers (which often classify, or refer to material)
usually follow adjectives.

a big new car factory enormous black iron gates

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark65>>6    commas

Before nouns, we generally use commas between adjectives (especially in
longer sequences) which give similar kinds of information, for example
in physical descriptions.

a lovely, long, cool, refreshing drink an expensive, ill-planned,
wasteful project But commas can be dropped before short common
adjectives. a tallC) dark(,) handsome cowboy

For and with adjectives, see 16. For commas with and, see 476.1.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark66>>16 adjectives (5): with and

When two or more adjectives (or other modifiers) come together, we
sometimes put and before the last one and sometimes not. It depends
partly on their position in the sentence.

<<main-2.xhtml#bookmark67>>1    after a verb

When adjectives come in predicative position (after be, seem and similar
verbs

- see 328), we usually put and before the last one.

He was tall, dark and handsome.

You're like a winter's day: short, dark and dirty.

In a very literary style, and is sometimes left out.

My soul is exotic, mysterious, incomprehensible.

<<main-3.xhtml>>

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    before a noun

In attributive position (before a noun), and is less common. an angry
young man (not an angry and young man) a big beautiful garden However,
and is possible when the adjectives give similar kinds of information,
especially when we are 'piling up' favourable or unfavourable
descriptions.

a cruel (and) vicious tyrant a warm (and) generous personality an
ill-planned, expensive (and) wasteful project.

And is necessary when two or more adjectives (or other modifiers) refer
to different parts of something, or different types of thing. a yellow
and black sports car a concrete and glass factory hot and cold drinks (=
hot drinks and cold drinks)

We also use and when we say that something belongs to two or more
different classes.

It's a social and political problem. She's a musical and artistic
genius.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark1>>3 nice and...

In an informal style, the expression nice and is often used before
another adjective or an adverb. It means something like ‘pleasantly' or
‘suitably*.

It's nice and warm in front of the fire. (= pleasantly warm)

The work was nice and easy.

Now just put your gun down nice and slow.

For more information about and, see 52 For commas with adjectives, see
15.6.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark2>>17 adjectives (6): without nouns

We cannot usually leave out a noun after an adjective.

Poor little boy! (not Poor Uttltf)

The most important thing is to be happy, (not The most important is to
be happy.)

But there are some exceptions.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark3>>1    well-known groups

The + adjective is used to talk about certain well-known groups of
people who are in a particular physical or social condition. Common
expressions: the blind the handicapped the old the unemployed the dead
the jobless    the poor the young

the deaf the mentally ill the rich

He's collecting money for the blind.

The unemployed are losing hope.

The meaning is usually general; occasionally a limited group is referred
to.

After the accident, the injured were taken to hospital.

These expressions are normally plural: the dead means ‘all dead people*
or ‘the dead people', but not ‘the dead person*.

Note that these expressions cannot be used with a possessive's. the
problems of the poor or poor people's problems (not the poor's problems)

Adjectives are normally only used in this way with the or a determiner
like many or more.

This government doesn't care about the poor, (not ... about poor.)

There are more unemployed than ever before.

However, adjectives without the are sometimes used in paired structures
with both ... and...

opportunities for both rich and poor

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    adjectives of nationality

A few adjectives of nationality ending in -sh or -ch (see 364.3) are
used after the without nouns. They include Irish, Welsh, English,
British, Spanish, Dutch, French.

The Irish are very proud of their sense of humour.    ►

These expressions are plural; singular equivalents are for example an
Irishwoman, a Welshman (not a-Welsh).

Where nouns exist, these are preferred to expressions with the.. .ish:
we say the Danes or the Turks (not the Danish or the Turkish).

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    singular examples

In a few formal fixed phrases, the + adjective can have a singular
meaning. These include the accused, the undersigned_{t} the deceased,
the former and the latter.

The accused was released on bail

... Mr Gray and Mrs Cook; the latter is a well-known designer.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark6>>4    abstract ideas

Adjectives are sometimes used after the to refer to general abstract
ideas, especially in philosophical writing. (Examples: the beautiful,
the supernatural the unreal) These expressions are singular.

She's interested in the supernatural

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark7>>5    choices

We sometimes leave out a noun that has already been mentioned, or which
does not need to be mentioned, when thinking about a choice between two
or more different kinds of thing.

Have you got any bread?* Do you want white or brown?

Vd like two large packets and one small Colour adjectives can sometimes
have a plural -s in this situation.

Wash the reds and blues separately (= red and blue clothes)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark8>>6    superlatives

Nouns are often left out after superlative adjectives.

Vm the tallest in my family. We bought the cheapest.

For other structures in which nouns can be left out, see 180.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark9>>18 adjectives (7): pronunciation of aged,
naked etc

A few adjectives ending in ~ed have a special pronunciation: the last
syllable is pronounced /id/ instead of /d/ or /t/(see 421.2). aged
/'eid3id/ (= very old) blessed /'blesid/ beloved /bi'lAvid/    dogged
/‘dogid/

crooked /‘krukid/    learned /‘l3:md/

cursed /'k3:sid/    sacred /'seikrid/

naked /'neikid/    wicked /'wikid/

ragged /'raegid/    wretched /'retjid/

rugged /‘rAgid/    one/three/four-legged /'legid/

Note that aged is pronounced /eid3d/ when it means 'years old* (as in He
has a daughter aged ten), or when it is a verb.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark10>>19    adjectives (8): what can follow an
adjective?

Many adjectives can be followed by ‘complements* - words and expressions
that ‘complete* their meaning. Not all adjectives are followed by the
same kind of complement. Some can be followed by preposition + noun
f-ing (see 297).

I'm interested in cookery. Vm interested in learning to cook.

Some can be followed by infinitives (see 284).

You don't look happy to see me. The soup is ready to eat An infinitive
may have its own subject, introduced by for (see 291).

Vm anxious for her to get a good education.

(= I'm anxious that she should get...)

Some adjectives can be followed by clauses (see 521, 567, 446-447).

Pm glad that you were able to come.

It's important that everybody should feel comfortable.

And many adjectives can have more than one kind of complement.

I'm pleased about her promotion. I'm pleased to see you here.

I'm pleased that we seem to agree.

We rarely put adjective + complement before a noun (see 13.5).

He's a difficult person to understand.

(not He's a difficult to understand person.)

For the structures that are possible with a particular adjective, see a
good dictionary.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark11>>20    adverb particles

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark12>>1    adverb particles and prepositions

Words like down, in, up are not always prepositions. Compare:

-    I ran down the road.    - He's in his office.

Please sit down.    You can go in.

-    Something's climbing up my leg.

She's not up yet

In the expressions down the road, in his office and up my leg, the words
down, in and up are prepositions: they have objects [the road, his
office and my leg). In sit down, go in and She's not up, the words down,
in and up have no objects. They are adverbs, not prepositions.

Small adverbs like these are usually called ‘ adverb (ial) particles*.
They include above, about, across, ahead, along, (a)round, aside, away,
back, before, behind, below, by, down, forward, in, home, near, off, on,
out, over, past, through, under, up. Many words of this kind can be used
as both adverb particles and prepositions, but there are some
exceptions: for example back> away (only adverb particles); from, during
(only prepositions).

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    phrasal verbs

Adverb particles often join together with verbs to make two-word verbs,
sometimes with completely new meanings (e.g. break down, put off, work
out, give up). These are often called ‘phrasal verbs'. For details of
their use, see 599.

►

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark14>>3 adverb particles with be

Adverb particles are often used, rather like adjectives, as complements
of the verb be.

Why are all the lights on?    Hello! You*re back!

The match will be over by 4.30.

For inverted word order in sentences beginning with an adverb particle
(e.g. Out walked Sarah), see 303.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark15>>21 adverb position (1): introduction

Different kinds of adverbs go in different positions in a clause. Here
are some general rules; for more details, see 22-25.

Note: in the following explanations, the word adverb is generally used
both for one-word adverbs like here, often, and for longer adverb
phrases like in this house, once every six weeks.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark16>>1    verb and object: She speaks English well

We do not usually put adverbs between a verb and its object.

adverb + verb + object

I often get headaches. (not / get often headaches.)

verb + object + adverb

She speaks English well, (not She-speaks well English.)

But an adverb panicle like on_{t} off, out can go between a verb and a
noun object.

Could you switch off the light?

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark17>>2    front, mid- and end position

There are three normal positions for adverbs:

a front position (at the beginning of a clause)

Yesterday morning something very strange happened.

b mid-position (with the verb - for exact details see 24)

My brother completely forgot my birthday.

I have never understood her.

c end position (at the end of a clause)

What are you doing tomorrow?

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark18>>3    what goes where?

Connecting adverbs (which join a clause to what came before) go in front
position.

However, not everybody agreed.

Adverbs of indefinite frequency (e.g. always, often) and adverbs of
certainty usually go in mid-position.

My boss often travels to America.

I've definitely decided to change my job.

Adverbs of manner (how), place (where) and time (when) most often go in
end position.

She brushed her hair slowly. The children are playing upstairs.

I phoned Alex this morning.

Time adverbs can also go in front position.

Tomorrow I've got a meeting in Cardiff.

For more details about the position of these and other kinds of adverb,
see the next four sections.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark19>>22 adverb position (2): front position

Adverbs that usually go in front position: connecting adverbs (e.g.
then, next); comment adverbs (e.g. fortunately, surprisingly); maybe,
perhaps.

Adverbs that can go in front position: some adverbs of indefinite
frequency (e.g. sometimes); adverbs of place; adverbs of time.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark20>>1    connecting adverbs: then, next, ...

These adverbs join a clause to what came before.

Examples: then, next, besides, anyway, suddenly, however.

I worked until five o'clock. Then I went home.

Next, I want to say something about the future.

Suddenly the door opened.

Some of us want a new system. However, not everybody agrees.

Other positions are possible.

I went home then. Not everybody, however, agrees.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark21>>2    comment adverbs: fortunately,
surprisingly,...

Adverbs which give the speaker's opinion of an action most often go in
front position.

Fortunately, she has decided to help us. Stupidly, I forgot my keys.
Mid-position is also possible.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark22>>3    indefinite frequency: usually,
normally,...

Usually, normally, often, frequently, sometimes and occasionally can go
in front position (but they are more common in mid-position - see 24.)

Sometimes I think Yd like to live somewhere else.

Usually I get up early.

Always, ever, rarely, seldom and never cannot normally go in front
position.

I always/never get up early, (not Always/Never I get up early.)

However, always and never can begin imperative clauses.

Always look in the mirror before starting to drive.

Never ask her about her marriage.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark23>>4    certainty: maybe, perhaps

Maybe and perhaps usually come at the beginning of a clause.

Maybe Vm right and maybe Vm wrong.

Perhaps her train is late.

Other adverbs of certainty (e.g. probably, definitely, certainly)
usually go in mid-position.    ►

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark24>>5    place: at the end of the garden, here,
there

Place adverbs most often go in end position, but front position is
possible, especially in literary writing and if the adverb is not the
main focus of the message. In this case the verb often comes before the
subject (see 303).

At the end of the garden stood a very tall tree.

On the grass sat an enormous frog. Down came the rain.

Here and there often begin clauses. Note the word order in Here/There
is, Here comes and There goes

Here comes your bus. (not Here your bus comes.)

There's Alice. There goes our train!

Pronoun subjects come directly after here and there.

Here it comes. (not Here comes it)

There she is. (not There is she.)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark25>>6    time: today, afterwards, in June, soon,
every week

Front position is common if the adverb is not the main focus of the
message. Today Vm going to London.    In June we went to Cornwall.

Afterwards we sat round and talked. Soon everything will be different
End-position is also common; soon can go in mid-position.

Time expressions beginning every can go in front position.

Every week she has a new hairstyle.

But other expressions of definite frequency (e.g. daily, weekly)
normally go in end position.

For rarely, seldom, never, hardly and scarcely in front position before
verb + subject ('inversion'), see 302.7.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark26>>23 adverb position (3): end position

Adverbs of manner, place and time usually go in end position, often in
that order. Adverbs of indefinite frequency (e.g. occasionally)
sometimes go in end position.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark27>>1 adverbs of manner

Adverbs of manner say how something happens or is done.

Examples: angrily, happily, fast, slowly, well badly, nicely, noisily,
quietly, hard, softly.

He drove off angrily.    She read the letter slowly.

You speak English well John tvorks really hard Adverbs in -Zy can also
go in mid-position if the adverb is not the main focus of the message.

She angrily tore up the letter. I slowly began to feel better again.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    adverbs of place

Examples: upstairs, around, frere, to bed,, in London,_{}} out of the
window.

The children are playing upstairs.    Come and sit here.

Don't throw orange peel out of the window.

She's sitting at the end of the garden.

Front position is also possible, especially in literary writing and if
the adverb is not the main focus of the message (see 22.5).

At the end of the garden there was a very tall tree.

Adverbs of direction (movement) come before adverbs of position.

The children are running around upstairs.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark29>>3    adverbs of time and definite frequency

Examples: today, afterwards, in June, last year, finally, before,
eventually, already, soon, still, last, daily, weekly, every year.

I'm going to London today.    What did you do afterwards?

She has a new hairstyle every week.

Front position is also common if the adverb is not the main focus of the
message.

Today I'm going to London. Every week she has a new hairstyle.

Finally, eventually, already, soon and last can also go in mid-position.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark30>>4    manner, place, time

Most often, adverbs of manner, place and time go in that order.

Put the butter in the fridge at once, (not .. .-at once in the fridge)

Let's go to bed early. (not ... early to bed.)

I worked hard yesterday.

She sang beautifully in the town hall last night.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark31>>5    adverbs of indefinite frequency:
usually, normally, often, frequently, sometimes and occasionally.

These adverbs can go in end position if they are the main focus of the
message (but they are more common in mid-position - see 24).

I go there occasionally.    We see her quite often.

I get very depressed sometimes.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark32>>24 adverb position (4): mid-position

Adverbs that usually go in mid-position: adverbs of indefinite frequency
(e.g. sometimes), certainty (e.g. probably) and completeness (e.g.
almost). Adverbs that can go in mid-position: focusing adverbs (e.g.
just), some adverbs of manner (e.g. angrily), comment adverbs (e.g.
fortunately).

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark33>>1 What exactly is mid-position?

Mid-position adverbs usually go before one-part verbs, after auxiliary
verbs, and after am/are/is/was/were.

before one-part verbs

I always play tennis on Saturdays. (not I play always tennis...)

It certainly looks like rain. We nearly won the match.    »

after auxiliary verbs

She has never written to me. (not usually She never has written to me.)
He was definitely trying to get into the house.

The train will probably be late. You can almost see the sea from here.

after am/are/is/was/were

She was always kind to me. (not usually She always was kind to me.)

It is probably too late now. I am obviously not welcome here.

When there are two or more auxiliaries, the adverb usually goes after
the first. You have definitely been working too hard.

She would never have been promoted if she hadn't changed jobs.

When an auxiliary verb is used alone instead of a complete verb phrase
(see 181), a mid-position adverb comes before it Are you working? I
certainly am.

I don't trust politicians. I never have, and I never will.

For some more advanced points, see paragraphs 8-11 below.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark34>>2    indefinite frequency (how often)

Examples: always, ever, usually, normally, often, frequently, sometimes,
occasionally, rarely, seldom, never.

We usually go to Scotland in August.

It sometimes gets very windy here. I have never seen a whale.

You can always come and stay with us if you want to.

Have you ever played American football?

My boss is often bad-tempered.    I'm seldom late for work.

We have never been invited to one of their parties.

She must sometimes have wanted to run away.

Usually, normally, often, frequently, sometimes and occasionally can
also go in front or end position (see 22-23).

Sometimes I think I'd like to live somewhere else.

I see her occasionally.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark35>>3    adverbs of certainty

Examples: probably, certainly, definitely, clearly, obviously.

He probably thinks you don't like him.

It will certainly rain this evening. There is clearly something wrong.

I definitely feel better today.    The train has obviously been delayed

Maybe and perhaps usually come at the beginning of a clause (see 22).
Maybe I'm right and maybe I'm wrong.

Perhaps her train is late.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark36>>4    adverbs of completeness

Examples: completely, practically, almost, nearly, quite, rather,
partly, sort of kind of, more or less, hardly, scarcely.

I have completely forgotten your name. The house is partly ready.

Sally can practically read    I kind of hope she wins.

It was almost dark.    It hardly matters.

Adverbs of completeness usually follow all auxiliary verbs.

I will have completely finished by next June.

(not I will completely have finished...)

Do you think the repair has been properly done?

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark37>>5    comment adverbs

Adverbs which give the speaker's opinion of an action sometimes go in
mid-position.

I stupidly forgot my keys. She has fortunately decided to help us.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark38>>6    focusing adverbs

These adverbs ‘point to' one part of a clause.

Examples: also (see 46-47), just (see 307), even (see 189), only (see
398), mainly, mostly_{}} either (see 175), or, neither (see 374), nor
(see 374).

Your bicycle just needs some oil - that's all She neither said *Thank
you' nor looked at me.

He's been everywhere - he's even been to Antarctica.

We're only going for two days.

She's my teacher, but she's also my friend.

The people at the meeting were mainly scientists.

Some of these adverbs can also go in other places in a clause, direcdy
before the words they modify. For details, see the entries on each
adverb.

Only you could do a thing like that. I feel really tired

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark39>>7    adverbs of manner

These adverbs say how something happens or is done.

Examples: angrily, happily, slowly, suddenly, noisily, quietly, softly.

Adverbs of manner most often go in end position (see 23), but adverbs
ending in -ly can often go in mid-position if the adverb is not the main
focus of the message.

She angrily tore up the letter. I slowly began to feel better again.

We have suddenly decided to sell the house.

This time next week I'll be happily working in my garden.

Mid-position (after all auxiliary verbs) is especially common with
passive verbs. The driver has been seriously injured

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark40>>8    mid-position (details): adverbs with
negative verbs

In negative sentences, adverbs generally come before not if they
emphasise the negative; otherwise they come after. Compare:

I certainly do not agree. I do not often have headaches.

Both positions are possible with some adverbs, often with a difference
of meaning. Compare:

I don't really like her. (mild dislike)

I really don't like her. (strong dislike)

When adverbs come before not, they may also come before the first
auxiliary verb; they always come before do.

I probably will not be there, (or I will probably not be there.)

He probably does not know, (not He-does- probably not know.)

Only one position is possible before a contracted negative.

I probably won't be there.    »

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark41>>9 mid-position (details): adverbs with
emphatic verbs

When we emphasise auxiliary verbs or am/are/islwasfwere, we put most
mid-position adverbs before them instead of after. Compare:

-    She has certainly made him angry. - Vm realty sorry.

She certainly HAS made him angry! I really AM sorry.

-    Polite people always say thank-you.

Yes, well, I always do say thank-you.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark42>>10    mid-position (details): modal auxiliary
verbs

When the first part of the verb phrase is a modal auxiliary (see 353),
used to or have to, mid-position adverbs can come before or after the
auxiliary.

They sometimes must be bored. (or They must sometimes be bored.)

She could have easily been killed (or She could easily have been
killed.) We always used to go to the seaside in May. (or We used always
to go ... or We used to always go ...)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark43>>11    mid-position (details): American
English

In American English (see 51), mid-position adverbs are often put before
auxiliary verbs and am/are/is/was/were_{t} even when the verb is not
emphasised. Compare:

He has probably arrived by now. (BrE normal)

He probably has arrived by now. (AmE normal, BrE emphatic)

As an extreme example, here are four sentences in a journalistic style
taken from an American newspaper article on crime in Britain. The most
normal British equivalents are given in brackets.

Britain long has been known as a land of law and order/

(BrE Britain has long been known...)

'... but it probably will lead to a vote (BrE ... but it will probably
lead ...)

'... the Labor Party often has criticized police actions.'

(BrE ...the Labour Party has often criticised...)

'...he ultimately was responsible for the treatment (BrE ...he was
ultimately responsible ...)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark44>>25 adverb position (5): emphasising adverbs

Examples: very, extremely, terribly, just (meaning ‘exactly' or ‘a short
time'), almost, really, right.

These adverbs go directly before the words that they emphasise or ‘point
to'. We all thought she sang very well Everybody was extremely annoyed
with Julian.

Vm terribly sorry about last night.

Vll see you in the pub just before eight o'clock.

He threw the ball almost over the house.

Vm really tired today.

She walked right past me.

Almost can also go in mid-position (see 24.4).

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark45>>26 adverbs of manner and adjectives

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark46>>1    adverbs of manner with verbs

Adverbs of manner say how something happens or is done.

Examples: happily, terribly, fast, badly, well

These adverbs should not be confused with adjectives {happy, terrible
etc). We use adverbs, not adjectives, to modify verbs.

J-I

verb + adverb

She danced happily into the room. (not She-daneed happy...)

She sang badly, (not She sang bad.)

1 don't remember him very well, (not ... very good.)

But note that adjective forms are sometimes used as adverbs in an
informal style, especially in American English (see 27).

She talks funny.

For the use of adjectives after link verbs like look or seem, see 328.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark47>>2    other uses

These adverbs can also modify adjectives, past participles, other
adverbs and adverbial phrases.

adverb + adjective

It's terribly cold today, (not .. .-terrible cold.)

i-i

adverb + past participle

This steak is very badly cooked (not .. .-badcooked:) j ; adverb +
adverb

They're playing unusually fast (not .. .-unusual-fast:)

I-1

adverb + adverbial phrase

He was madly in love with her. (not ... mad in love-...)

For adjectives ending in -ly, see the next section.

For adverbs and adjectives with the same form, see the next section.

For the adjective well, see 617.

For the position of adverbs of manner, see 23.1, 22.7.

For spelling rules, see 557.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark48>>27 adverbs or adjectives? confusing cases

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark49>>1    adjectives ending in -ly

Some words ending in -ly are adjectives, and not normally adverbs.
Common examples: costly, cowardly, deadly, friendly, likely, lively,
lonely, lovely, silly, ugly, unlikely.

She gave me a friendly smile.

Her singing was lovely.

There are no adverbs friendly!friendlily, lovelyflovelily etc.

She smiled in a friendly way. (not She-smited-friendfy.)

He gave a silly laugh, (not He laughed-siHy.)

Daily, weekly, monthly, yearly, ear/y and leisurely are both adjectives
and adverbs.

Ifs a daily paper. It comes out daily. an early train I got up early.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark50>>2    adjectives and adverbs with the same
form; adverbs with two forms

Some adjectives and adverbs have the same form: for example, a fast car
goes fast, if you do hard work, you work hard. In other cases, the
adverb may have two forms (e.g. late and lately), one like the adjective
and the other with -ly. There is usually a difference of meaning or use.
Some examples follow; for more detailed information, check in a good
dictionary.

bloody Some swearwords (see 575), including bloody (BrE), can be used
both as adjectives and as adverbs.

You bloody fool. You didn't look where you were going. *~I bloody did.

clean The adverb clean means ‘completely' before forget (informal) and
some expressions of movement.

Sorry I didn't turn up-I clean forgot.

The explosion blew the cooker clean through the wall.

dead The adverb dead is used in certain expressions to mean
'exactly^{1}, ‘completely' or ‘very'. Examples: dead ahead, dead
certain, dead drunk, dead right, dead slow, dead straight, dead sure,
dead tired.

Note that deadly is an adjective, meaning ‘fataT, ‘causing death'. The
adverb for this meaning is fatally. Compare:

Cyanide is a deadly poison. She was fatally injured in the crash.

direct Direct is often used informally as an adverb.

The plane goes direct from London to Houston without stopping.

50% cheaper - order direct from the factory!

easy Easy is used as an adverb in some informal expressions.

Go easy! (= Not too fast!) Take it easy! (= Relax!)

Easy come, easy go. Easier said than done.

fair Fair is used as an adverb after a verb in some expressions. to play
fair to fight fair to hit something fair and square

For the adverb of degree fairly, see 199.

fast Fast can mean both 'quick' and ‘quickly' (a fast car goes fast).
Fast means ‘completely' in the expression fast asleep, and it means
‘tight', ‘impossible to remove' in expressions like hold fast, stick
fast, fast colours.

fine The adverb fine (= well) is used in some informal expressions.

That suits me fine. You're doing fine.

The adverb finely is used to talk about small careful adjustments and
similar ideas.

a finely tuned engine finely chopped onions (= cut up very small)

flat Flat can be used as an adverb in a musical sense {to sing flat
means ‘to sing on a note that is too low'). In most other cases, the
adverb is flatly.

free The adverb free (used after a verb) means 'without payment'; freely
means ‘without limit or restriction'. Compare:

You can eat free in my restaurant whenever you like.

You can speak freely - / won't tell anyone what you say.

hard The adverb hard means ‘with a lot of force, energetically*.

Hit it hard. I trained really hard for the marathon.

Hardly means ‘almost not'.

I've hardly got any clean clothes left.

Compare:

Ann works hard Her brother hardly works.

For hardly... when in clauses of time* see 233.

For hardly any, ever etc, see 43.3.

high High refers to height; highly (rather formal) expresses an extreme
degree (it often means ‘very much'). Compare:

- He can jump really high.    - It's highly amusing.

Throw it as high as you can.    I can highly recommend it.

just Just is an adverb with several meanings (see 307). There is also an
adjective just, meaning ‘in accordance with justice or the law'; the
adverb is justly.

He was justly punished for his crimes.

late The adverb late has a similar meaning to the adjective late, lately
means ‘recently*. Compare:

I hate arriving late. I haven't been to the theatre much lately.

loud Loud is often used informally as an adverb after a verb.

Don't talk so loudfly) - you'll wake the whole street. low Low is an
adjective and adverb (a low bridge, a low voice, bend low).

most Most is the superlative of much, and is used to form superlative
adjectives and adverbs (see 137).

Which part of the concert did you like most?

This is the most extraordinary day of my life.

In a formal style, most can be used to mean ‘very' (see 356.7).

You're a most unusual person Mostly means ‘mainly*, ‘most often' or ‘in
most cases'.

My friends are mostly non-smokers.    ►

pretty The informal adverb of degree pretty is similar to rather (see
199). Prettily means 'in a pretty way'. Compare:

I'm getting pretty fed up. Isn't your little girl dressed prettily?

quick In an informal style, quick is often used instead of quickly,
especially after verbs of movement.

I'll get back as quickdy) as I can.

real In informal American English, real is often used instead of really
before adjectives and adverbs.

That was real nice: He cooks real well

right Right with adverb phrases means 'just', 'exactly' or 'all the
way*.

She arrived right after breakfast.

The snowball hit me right on the nose.

Turn the gas right down.

Right and rightly can both be used to mean ‘correctiy'. Right is only
used after verbs, and is usually informal. Compare:

I rightly assumed that Henry was not coming. You guessed right.

It serves you rigjht. (... rightly is not possible.)

sharp Sharp can be used as an adverb to mean 'punctually'.

Can you be there at six o'clock sharp?

It also has a musical sense (to sing sharp means *to sing on a note that
is too high'), and is used in the expressions turn sharp left and turn
sharp right (meaning 'with a big change of direction').

In other senses the adverb is sharply.

She looked at him sharply.

I thought you spoke to her rather sharply.

short Short is used as an adverb in the expressions stop short (= 'stop
suddenly') and cut short (= 'interrupt'). Shortly means ‘soon'; it can
also describe an impatient way of speaking.

slow Slow is used as an adverb in road signs (e.g. slow - dangerous
bend), and informally after go and some other verbs. Examples: go slow,
drive slow.

sound Sound is used as an adverb in the expression sound asleep. In
other cases, soundly is used (e.g. She's sleeping soundly).

straight The adverb and the adjective are the same. A straight road goes
straight from one place to another.

sure Sure is often used to mean 'certainly' in an informal style,
especially in American English.

Can I borrow your tennis racket? ~ Sure.

Surely (not) is used to express opinions or surprise (see 573 for
details). Surety house prices will stop rising soon!

Surely you're not going out in that old coat?

tight After a verb, tight can be used instead of tightly, especially in
an informal style. Typical expressions: hold tight, packed tigfat
(compare tightly packed).

well Well is an adverb corresponding to the adjective good (a good
singer sings well). Well is also an adjective meaning ‘in good health'
(the opposite of ///). For details, see 617.

wide The normal adverb is wide; widely suggests distance or separation.
Compare:

The door was wide open She's travelled widely.

They have widely differing opinions.

Note also the expression wide awake (the opposite of fast asleep).

wrong Wrong can be used informally instead of wrongly after a verb.
Compare: I wrongly believed that you wanted to help me.

You guessed wrong.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark51>>3    comparatives and superlatives

Informal uses of adjective forms as adverbs are especially common with
comparatives and superlatives.

Can you drive a bit slower? Let's see who can do it quickest

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark52>>4    American English

In informal American English, many other adjective forms can also be
used as adverbs of manner.

He looked at me real strange. Think positive.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark53>>28 afraid

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark54>>1    afraid and fear

In an informal style, be afraid is more common than fear.

Don't be afraid (not Don't fear) She's afraid that I might find out Are
you afraid of the dark?    I'm not afraid to say what I think.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    I'm afraid = Tm sorry^{9}

I'm afraid (that) often means Tm sorry to tell you (that)'. It is used
to introduce apologetic refusals and bad news.

Vm afraid (that) I can't help you.

I'm afraid that there's been an accident I'm afraid so/not are used as
'short answers'.

Can you lend me a pound?~ I'm afraid not It's going to rain ~ Yes, I'm
afraid so.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark56>>3    not used before a noun

Afraid is one of the adjectives that are not usually used before a noun
in ‘attributive position' (see 12). Compare:

John's afraid

John's a frightened man. (not .. .-anrofraidman.)

For information about -ing forms and infinitives after afraid, see
299.13.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark57>>29    after: adverb

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark58>>1    shortly after etc.

After can be used in adverb phrases like shortly after, long after, a
few days after etc.

We had oysters for supper. Shortly after,1 began to feel ill In more
exact expressions of time, later is more common.

They started the job on the 16th and finished three weeks later.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark59>>2    after not used alone

After is not normally used alone as an adverb. Instead, we use other
expressions like afterwards (AmE also afterward5, then or after that.

Vm going to do my exams, and afterwards Vm going to study medicine. (not
.. .-and-afterr-I-itt-gemg-...)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark60>>30    after: conjunction

after + clause, + clause clause + after + clause

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark61>>1    use and position

The conjunction after joins one clause to another. After and its clause
can come either before or after the other clause.

After I left school, I went to America.

I went to America after I left school.

(In both cases the speaker left school first and then went to America.
In the second example, the a/3ter-clause is given more importance
because it comes at the end. Note the comma in the first structure.)

After he did military service, he went to university.

(He did military service first.)

He did military service after he went to university.

(He went to university first.)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark62>>2    present with future meaning

We use after with a present tense to talk about the future (see 580).

YU telephone you after I arrive, (not .. .-after I will arrive.)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark63>>3    perfect tenses

In clauses with after, we often use present and past perfect tenses to
show that one thing is completed before another starts.

YU telephone you after I've seen Jake.

After I had finished school, I went to America.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark64>>4    after...ing

In a formal style, we often use the structure after + -ing.

After completing this form, give it to the secretary.

After having + past participle is also possible when talking about the
past. He wrote his first book after returning / having returned from
Mongolia.

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark65>>31    after all

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark66>>1    two meanings

After all can mean ‘in spite of what was said before* or ‘contrary to
what was expected*. Position: usually at the end of a clause.

Vm sorry. I know I said I would help you, but I can't after all I
expected to fail the exam, but I passed after all Another meaning is 'we
mustn't forget that.. .*, introducing an argument or reason which may
have been forgotten. Position: at the beginning or end of a clause.

Of course you're tired. After all, you were up all night.

Let's finish the cake. Somebody's got to eat it, after all

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark67>>2    not used for 'finally'

After all does not mean ‘finally*, ‘at last', ‘in the end*.

After the theatre we had supper and went to a nightclub; then we finally
went home, (not .. .-afier-att-we went home;)

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark68>>32    age

<<main-3.xhtml#bookmark69>>1    use of be

We most often talk about people's ages with be + number He is thirty,
(not He has thirty.) or be + number + years old (more formal:... of
age).

He is thirty years old / of age. (not ... thirty years.)

We ask How old are you?, not normally What is your age?

<<main-4.xhtml>>

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    be + ... age

Note the structure be + ... age (without a preposition).

When I was your age I was working, (not When I wasatyottr-age...)

The two boys are the same age. She's the same age as me.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    prepositions

In other structures, at is common before age.

He could read at the age of three, (not ... in the age...)

At your age 1 already had a job.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark2>>33    ago

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark3>>1    word order: six weeks ago

Ago follows an expression of time.

I met her six weeks ago. (not ... ago six weeks.) a long time ago

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    tenses

An expression with ago refers to a finished time, and is normally used
with a past tense, not a present perfect (see 455.5).

She phoned a Jew minutes ago. (not She has phoned...)

Where's Mike? ~ He was working outside ten minutes ago.    >

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    the difference between ago and for

Ago says how long before the present something happened; for (with a
past tense) says how long it lasted. Compare:

He died three years ago. (= three years before now)

(not He-died-for-three-years. or ...for three-years-ago.)

He was ill for three years before he died (= His illness lasted three
years.)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark6>>4    ago and before with time expressions:
counting back

We use ago with a past tense and a time expression to ‘count back' from
the present; to say how long before now something happened.

We can use before in the same way (with a past perfect tense) to count
back from a past moment (see also 96). Compare:

I met that woman in Scotland three years ago.

(not ... three years before f before three years.)

When we got talking,I found out that I had been at school with her
husband ten years before, (not ... -ten-years ago:)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark7>>ago and before

I met her three years ago. I had been at school with her husband ten
years before.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark8>>34    alike

The adjective alike means ‘like each other'. Compare:

The two boys are alike in looks, but not in personality.

He's like his brother. (not He's alike his brother.)

Alike is not often used before a noun (see 12). Compare:

His two daughters are very much alike.

He's got two very similar-looking daughters, (not ... alike daughters.)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark9>>35    all (1): introduction

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark10>>1 three or more items

All refers to three or more items. Compare:

I'll take all three shirts, please.

I'll take both shirts. (not ... all two shirts.)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    all (of) with nouns and pronouns

All modifies nouns or pronouns.

All (of) the people were singing. I haven't read all of it Give my love
to them all

See 36 for details of word order, and the use of all of

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark12>>3    with the subject or the verb

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark13>>When all modifies the subject, it can go
either with the subject or with the verb.

All the people were singing. The people were all singing;

For more examples, see 36-37.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark14>>4    all without a noun

All can sometimes be used without a noun to mean 'everything* but only
in certain structures (see 38).

All that matters is to be happy. That's all

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark15>>5    all with adjectives, adverbs etc

All can be used to emphasise some adjectives! prepositions and adverbs.
You're all wet    She walked all round the town.

I was all alone.    Tell me all about your holiday.

It's all because of you.    I looked all round, but I couldn't

see anything.

All, both and half follow similar grammar rules. For both, see 110; for
half, see 231.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark16>>36 all (2): all (of) with nouns and pronouns

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark17>>1    all and all of

All (of) can modify nouns and pronouns.

Before a noun with a determiner (for example the, my, this), all and all
of are both possible. All is more common than all of

She's eaten all (of) the cake. AU (of) my friends like riding.

Before a noun with no determiner, we do not normally use of All children
can be difficult (not All of children ...)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark18>>2    all of + personal pronoun

With personal pronouns, we use all o/+ us!you!them.

All of us/you/them can be a subject or object.

All of us can come tomorrow, (not All we...)

She's invited all of you. Mary sent aU of them her love.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark19>>3    pronoun + all

We can put all after pronouns used as objects.

She's invited you all Mary sent her love to them all

I've made us all something to eat.    ►

This does not happen with complement pronouns (after be) or in short
answers.

I think that's all of them, (not i-think that's them all)

Who did she invite? ~All of us. (not Us-etU.)

All can follow a subject pronoun (e.g. They all went home), but in this
case it belongs grammatically with the verb (see 37) and may be
separated from the pronoun (e.g. They have all gone home).

For the American plural pronoun you all, see 429.8.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark20>>4    types of noun

All is used mostly before uncountable and plural nouns.

all the water all my friends However, all can be used before some
singular countable nouns referring to things that can naturally be
divided into parts.

all that week all my family all the way We can also use all (of) before
proper nouns (e.g. the names of places or writers).

All (of) London knew about her affairs. I've read all (of) Shakespeare.
With other singular countable nouns, it is more natural to use whole
(e.g. the whole story). For details, see 40.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark21>>5    leaving out the

After all, we sometimes leave out the before numbers.

all (the) three brothers And we usually leave out the in all day_{t} all
night, all week, all year, all winter and all summer.

She stayed here all day. (not .. .-all-the day).

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark22>>6    not all...

It is not very common to use all + noun as the subject of a negative
verb (e.g. All Americans don't like hamburgers). We more often use not
all + noun + affirmative verb.

Not all Americans like hamburgers.

Note the difference between not all and no. Compare:

Not all birds can fly.

No birds can play chess.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark23>>37 all (3): with the verb

When all refers to the subject of a clause, it can go with the verb, in
'midposition' (for details of word order, see 24.)

We can all swim.    Those apples were all bad.

The guests have all arrived. My family all work in education.

Note that these meanings can also be expressed by using all (of) with
the subject (see 36).

All of us can swim. All (of) the guests have arrived.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark24>>38    all (4): all, everybody/everyone and
everything

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark25>>1    all and everybody/everyone

We do not normally use all without a noun to mean 'everybody'. Compare:
All the people stood up.

Everybody/Everyone stood up. (not All stood up.)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark26>>2    all and everything

All can mean ‘everything', but usually only in the structure all +
relative clause (all that...). Compare:

-    All (that) I have is yours, (not All what I have...)

Everything is yours, (not All- is yours.)

-    She lost all (that) she owned

She lost everything, (not She lost all.)

This structure often has a rather negative meaning, expressing ideas
like ‘nothing more' or ‘the only thing(s)'.

This is all Vue got. All I want is a place to sit down.

All that happened was that he went to sleep.

Note also That's all (= It's finished; There's no more).

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark27>>3    older English

In older English, all could be used alone to mean ‘everybody^{1} or
‘everything* (e.g. Tell me all; All is lost, AU are dead). This only
happens regularly in modern English in dramatic contexts like newspaper
headlines (e.g. SPY tells all).

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark28>>39    all and every

All and every can both be used to talk about people or things in
general, or about all the members of a group. There is little difference
of meaning; every often suggests ‘without exception'. The two words are
used in different structures.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark29>>1    every with singular nouns; all with
plurals

Every is used with a singular noun. To give the same meaning, all is
used with a plural noun. Compare:

-    Every child needs love, (not All child needs love.)

All children need love.

-    Every light was out

AU (of) the lights were out

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark30>>2    every not used with determiners

We can use all (of), but not normally every, with certain determiners
(articles, possessives or demonstratives). Compare:

-    All (of) the plates were broken.

Every plate was broken. (not Every the plate / The every plate ...)

-    I've written to all (of) my friends.

Vve written to every friend I have, (not ... every my friend /
my-every-friend)

►

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark31>>3    all with uncountables

We can use all, but not every, with uncountable nouns.

I like all music, (not ... every music;)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark32>>4    all day and every day etc

Note the difference between all dayfweek etc and every day/week etc.

She was here all day. (= from morning to night)

She was here every day. (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,...)

For the difference between every and each, see 170.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark33>>40 all and whole

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark34>>1    pronunciation

all /oil/ whole /haul/

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark35>>2    word order

All (of) and whole can both be used with singular nouns to mean
‘complete*, ‘every part of. The word order is different.

all (of) + determiner + noun determiner + whole + noun

- Julie spent aU (of) the summer at home. - all (of) my life Julie spent
the whole summer at home.    my whole life

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark36>>3    indefinite reference

All is not generally used before indefinite articles.

She's eaten a whole loaf, (not ... all a loaf)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark37>>4    uncountable nouns

With most uncountable nouns we prefer all (of).

I've drunk all (of) the milk, (not ... the whole milk.)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark38>>5    the whole of

Instead of whole we can generally use the whole of Julie spent the whole
of the summer at home the whole of my life Before proper nouns (names)
and pronouns we always use the whole of not whole. All (of) is also
possible.

The whole of/All of Venice was under water, (not Whole Venice...)

I've just read the whole of/ all of War and Peace'.

I've read the whole of/ all of it

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark39>>6    plural nouns

With plural nouns, all and whole have different meanings. All is like
every; whole means ‘complete', ‘entire'. Compare:

AU Indian tribes suffered from white settlement in America. (= Every
Indian tribe suffered ...)

Whole Indian tribes were killed off. (= Complete tribes were killed off;
nobody was left alive in these tribes.)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark40>>41    all right and alright

The standard spelling is all right. Alright is common, but some people
consider it incorrect

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark41>>42    allow, permit and let

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark42>>1    allow and permit

These words have similar meanings and uses. Permit is more formal. Both
words can be followed by object + infinitive.

We do not allow/permit people to smoke in the kitchen.

When there is no personal object, an -ing form is used.

We do not allowlpermit smoking in the kitchen.

Passive structures are common; personal subjects and gerund (-ing form)
subjects are both possible.

People are not allowed/permitted to smoke in the kitchen.

Smoking is not allowed/permitted in the kitchen.

The passive structure with it is only possible with permit

It is not permitted to smoke in the kitchen. (but not It is not allowed
to smoke...)

Allow, but not permit, can be used with adverb particles.

She wouldn't allow me in. Mary isn't allowed out at night.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark43>>2    let

Let is the least formal of these three words, and is followed by object
+ infinitive without to. Compare:

Please allow me to buy you a drink, (polite and formal)

Let me buy you a drink. (friendly and informal)

Let is not usually used in the passive.

I wasn't allowed to pay for the drinks. (not I wasn't let...)

Let can be used with adverb particles; passives are possible in this
case.

She wouldn't let me in. I've been let down.

For more about let, see 322-323.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark44>>43    almost and nearly; practically

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark45>>1 progress, measurement and counting

Almost and nearly can both express ideas connected with progress,
measurement or counting. Nearly is less common in American English.

I've almost/nearly finished

There were almost/nearly a thousand people there.

Sometimes almost is a little ‘nearer* than nearly. Compare:

It's nearly ten o'clock (= perhaps 9.45)

It's almost ten o'clock. (= perhaps 9.57)

Very and pretty can be used with nearly but not almost.

I've very/pretty nearly finished, (not .. . very almost...)    ►

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark46>>2    other meanings

We can use almost to mean 'similar to, but not exactly the same', and to
make statements less definite. Nearly is not used like this.

Jake is almost like a father to me.

Our cat understands everything - he's almost human, (not ... he's nearly
human.)

My aunt's got a strange accent She almost sounds foreign, (not .. .She
nearly sounds foreign.)

I almost wish Vd stayed at home, (not I nearly wish ...)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark47>>3    never, nobody, nothing etc

We do not usually use nearly before negative pronouns or adverbs like
never, nobody, nothing. Instead, we use almost, or we use hardly with
ever, anybody, anything etc.

She's almost never I hardly ever at home, (not ... nearly never-...)

Almost nobody / hardly anybody was there.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark48>>4    everybody, everything, anybody, anything
etc

We also prefer almost before everybody!-one!-thing!-where, and almost is
much more common than nearly before anybody!-one!-thing!-where.

She likes almost everybody. Almost anybody can do this job.

He's been almost everywhere. He eats almost anything.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark49>>5    practically

Practically can be used in the same way as almost.

I've practically finished.    Jake is practically like a father to me.

She's practically never at home.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark50>>44    alone, lonely, lonesome and lone

Alone means ‘without others around*. Lonely (and informal AmE lonesome)
means ‘alone and unhappy because of it'. Compare:

I like to be alone for short periods.

But after a few days I start getting lonely/lonesome.

Alone can be emphasised by all.

After her husband died, she was all alone.

Alone is not used before a noun (see 12.3). Lone and solitary can be
used instead; lone is rather literary.

The only green thing was a lone/solitary pine tree.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark51>>45    along

The preposition along is used with nouns like road, river, corridor,
line: words that refer to things with a long thin shape.

I saw her running along the road.

His office is along the corridor.

To talk about periods or activities, we prefer through. through the
centuries (not along the centuries) all through the journey (not all
along the-joumey) right through the meal Note the special use of along
as an adverb particle in expressions like Come along (= Come with me) or
walking along (= walking on one's way).

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark52>>46 also, as well and too

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark53>>1    position

Also, as well and too have similar meanings, but they do not go in the
same position in clauses. Also usually goes with the verb, in
mid-position (see 24); as well and too usually go at the end of a
clause. As well is less common in AmE.

She not only sings; she also plays the piano.

She not only sings; she plays the piano as well She not only sings; she
plays the piano too.

As well and too do not go at the beginning of a clause. Also can go at
the beginning of a clause to give more importance to a new piece of
information. It's a nice house, but it's very small Also, it needs a lot
of repairs.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark54>>2    reference

These words can refer to different parts of a clause, depending on the
meaning. Consider the sentence We work on Saturdays as well This can
mean three different things:

a (Other people work on Saturdays, and) we work on Saturdays as well, b
(We do other things on Saturdays, and) we work on Saturdays as well, c
(We work on other days, and) we work on Saturdays as well.

When we speak, we show the exact meaning by stressing the word or
expression that also / as well / too refers to.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark55>>3    imperatives and short answers

As well and too are used in imperatives and short answers, but not
usually also. Give me some bread as well, please. (More natural than
Also give me...) She's nice. ~ Her sister is as well (More natural than
Her sister is also.)

I've got a headache. ~ I have too. (More natural than I also have.)

In very informal speech, we often use Me too as a short answer.

Vm going home. ~ Me too.

More formal equivalents are So am I (see 541) or I am too, but not
I-ako.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark56>>4    too in a formal style

In a formal or literary style, too can be placed directly after the
subject.

I, too, have experienced despair.

For also, as well, too and eitlter in negative clauses, see 47.

For also and even, see 189.3.

For as well as, see 78.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark57>>47    also, as well, too and either in
negative clauses

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark58>>1    negative + negative: either

After mentioning a negative idea or fact, we can add another negative
point by using not... either.

Peter isn't here today. John isn't here either. (not John isn't-here
neither.) Also, as well and too are not normally used with not in this
way.

You can't have an apple, and you can't have an orange either.

(not ... and you can't have an mange also / as well / fee:)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark59>>2    affirmative + negative: also / as well /
too

After mentioning an affirmative (non-negative) fact or idea, we can add
a negative point by using not... also, not ...as well or not... too.

You can have an apple, but you can't have an orange too He drinks too
much, but at least he doesn't smoke as well

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark60>>48    alternate(ly) and alternative(ly)

Alternate(ly) means ‘every second', ‘first one and then the other', ‘in
turns'. We spend alternate weekends at our country cottage.

Vm alternately happy and depressed.

Alternative(ly) is similar to ‘different', ‘instead', ‘on the other
hand'.

Janet's not free on the 27th. We'll have to find an alternative date.

You could go by air> or alternatively you could drive there.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark61>>49    although, though, but and however:
contrast

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark62>>1    although and though: conjunctions

Both these words can be used as conjunctions, with the same meaning. In
informal speech, though is more common. They introduce an idea (‘A')
with which die main clause CB') is in contrast. When we say '(Al)though
A, B', there is something unexpected or surprising about ‘B'.

(Al)though (A) I don't like him, (B) I agree that he's a good manager.

(B) I'd quite like to go out, (al)though (A) it is a bit late.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark63>>2    but and however

We can give the same meaning by putting but or however with the
contrasting, 'unexpected' clause CB').

(A) I don't like him, but (B) I agree that he's a good manager.

(A) I don't like him. However, (B) I agree that he's a good manager.

(A) It is a bit late, but (B) I'd quite like to go out.

(A) It is a bit late; however, (B) I'd quite like to go out.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark64>>3    but and however: the difference

But is a conjunction: it joins two clauses, and comes at the beginning
of the second. However is an adverb: it does not connect its sentence
grammatically

to the one before. This is why it comes after a full stop or a
semi-colon in the above examples.

However can go in various positions. It is normally separated from its
sentence by one or two commas, depending on its position.

However, the police did not believe him.

The police, however, did not believe him.

The police did not believe him_{t} however,

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark65>>4 though used as an adverb

We can use though as an adverb (often at the end of a sentence), to mean
'however'.

Nice day. ~ Yes. Bit cold, though.

The strongest argument, though, is economic and not political For as
though, see 74.

For sentences like Cold though it was, I went out, see 71.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark66>>50    altogether and all together

Altogether means ‘completely* or ‘considering everything*.

My new house isn't altogether finished.

Altogether, she decided, marriage was a bit of a mistake.

Altogether can also be used to give totals.

That's £4.38 altogether.

All together usually means ‘everybody/everything together*.

Come on, everybody sing. All together now ...

They all went to the cinema together.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark67>>51    American and British English

These two varieties of English are very similar. There are a few
differences of grammar and spelling, and rather more differences of
vocabulary and idiom. Modem British English is heavily influenced by
American English, so some contrasts are disappearing. Pronunciation is
sometimes very different, but most American and British speakers can
understand each other easily.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark68>>1 grammar

Here are examples of the most important differences. In many cases, two
different forms are possible in one variety of English, while only one
of the forms is possible or normal in the other variety.

American English    British English

He just went home.    He's just gone home. (See 307.2)

(or He's just gone home.)

I've never really gotten to    I've never really got to know her.

know her.    (See 223.7.)

I (can) see a car coming.    I can see a car coming. (See 125.1.)

►

American English

Her feet were sore because her shoes fit!fitted badly.

It's important that he be told.

Will you buy it? \^ I may.

The committee meets tomorrow.

(on the phone) Hello, is this Susan?

It looks like it's going to rain.

He looked at me real strange. (very informal) or He looked at me really
strangely.

He probably has arrived by now. or He has probably arrived...

British English

Her feet were sore because her shoes fitted badly. (See 304.3.) It's
important that he should be told. (See 567.)

...I may (do). (See 161.)

The committee meet! meets tomorrow. (See 526.1.)

Hello, is that Susan? (See 589.5.)

It looks asiff like it's going to rain.

(See 74.3.)

He looked at me really strangely. (See 27.)

He has probably arrived by now. (see 24.11.)

Besides get and fit, some other irregular verbs have different forms in
British and American English. For details, see 304.3.

For the Southern US second person plural pronoun you all, see 429.8.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark69>>vocabulary

There are very many differences. Sometimes the same word has different
meanings (BrE mad = crazy; AmE mad = angry). And very often, different
words are used for the same idea (BrE lorry = AmE truck). Here are a few
examples, with very brief information about the words and their
meanings. (A larger list with more complete information, can be found in
The British/ American Dictionary by Norman Moss, published by
Hutchinson. This is unfortunately now out of print, but may be
obtainable in libraries. A more recendy published guide to
British-American differences is: Mighty Fine Words and Smashing
Expressions - Making Sense of Transatlantic English, edited by Orin
Hargraves, Oxford University Press.)

American English

airplane

anyplace, anywhere apartment area code attorney, lawyer busy

call collect

can

candy

check/bill

coin-purse

cookie, cracker

com

crib

British English

aeroplane

anywhere

flat, apartment

dialling code (phone)

barrister, solicitor, lawyer

engaged (phone)

reverse the charges (phone)

tin, can

sweets

bill (in a restaurant)

purse

biscuit

sweet com, maize cot

American English

crazy

crosswalk

cuffs

diaper

doctor's office dumb, stupid elevator eraser

fall, autumn faucet, tap

first floor, second floor etc

flashlight

flat (tire)

french fries

garbage, trash

garbage can, trashcan

gas(oline)

gear shift

highway, freeway

hood

intersection

mad

mean

movie, film one-way (ticket) pants, trousers parking lot pavement
pitcher

pocketbook, purse, handbag

(potato) chips

railroad

raise

rest room, bathroom

resume

round trip

schedule, timetable

sidewalk

sneakers

spigot, faucet

stand in line

stingy

store, shop

subway

truck

trunk

two weeks

vacation

windshield

British English mad

pedestrian/zebra crossing turn-ups (on trousers) nappy

doctor's surgery

stupid

lift

rubber, eraser autumn tap (indoors)

ground floor, first floor etc torch

flat tyre, puncture

chips

rubbish

dustbin, rubbish bin petrol

gear lever (on a car)

main road, motorway

bonnet (on a car)

crossroads

angry

nasty

film

single (ticket) trousers car park road surface jug

handbag crisps railway rise (in salary)

(public) toilet CV

return (joumey/ticket)

timetable

pavement

trainers (= sports shoes) tap (outdoors) queue

mean (opposite of 'generous') shop

underground van, lorry boot (of a car) fortnight, two weeks holiday(s)

windscreen (on a car)

American English    British English

zee    zed {the name of the letter 'z^{1})

zipper    zip

Expressions with prepositions and particles

American English check something (out) different from/than do something
over/again in a course live on X street look around the church meet
somebody {by chance) / meet with somebody {planned)

Monday through/to Friday on a team on the weekend ten after/past four
{time) ten to/of/before/till four

British English check something different from/to (see 155) do something
again on a course live in X street

look (a) round the church (see 60) meet somebody

Monday to Friday in a team at the weekend ten past four ten to four

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark70>>spelling

A number of words end in -or in American English and -our in British
English (e.g. color!colour). Some words end in -er in American English
and -re in British English (e.g. center!centre). Many verbs which end in
-ize in American English (e.g. realize) can be spelt in British English
with -ize or -ise (see 558). Some of the commonest words with different
forms are:

British English

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

American English

aluminum

analyze

catalog(ue)

center

check

color

defense

enroll

fulfill

honor

jewelry

labor

liter

meter {measure)

neighbor

organize

pajamas

paralyze

practice, practise

program

realize

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

aluminium

analyse

catalogue

centre

cheque {paid by a bank)

colour

defence

enrol

fulfil

honour

jewellery

labour

litre

metre

neighbour

organise/organize

pyjamas

paralyse

practise {verb)

programme

realise/realize

British English

skilful

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

American English

skillful

theater/theatre

tire

traveller

whiskey

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

theatre

tyre (on a wheel) traveller (see 562)

(Scotch) whisky, (Irish) whiskey

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark71>>pronunciation

There are, of course, many different regional accents in both Britain
and

America. The most important general differences between American and

British speech are as follows:

a Certain vowels are nasal (pronounced through the nose and mouth at the
same time) in some varieties of American English, but not in most
British accents.

b British English has one more vowel than American English. This is the
rounded short o (/n/) used in words like cot, dog, got, gone_{%} off,
stop, lost. In American English these words are pronounced either with
/a:/, like the first vowel in father, or with /d:/, like the vowel in
caught. (This vowel is also pronounced rather differendy in British and
American English.)

c Some words written with a + consonant (e.g. fast, after) have
different pronunciations: with /a:/ in standard southern British
English, and with /ae/ in American and some other varieties of English.

d The vowel in home, go, open is pronounced /au/ in standard southern
British English, and jouj in American English. The two vowels sound very
different.

e In standard southern British English, r is only pronounced before a
vowel sound. In most kinds of American English, (and most other British
varieties) r is pronounced in all positions where it is written in a
word, and it changes the quality of a vowel that comes before it. So
words like car, turn, offer sound very different in British and American
speech.

f In many varieties of American English, t and d both have a very light
voiced pronunciation (/d/) between vowels - so writer and rider, for
example, can sound the same. In British English they are quite
different: /'rart9(r)/ and /'raida(r)/.

g Some words which are pronounced with /u:/ in most varieties of
American English have /ju:/ in British English. These are words in which
th, d, tor n (and sometimes 5 or Z) are followed by u or ew in writing.

| enthusiastic   | AmE /in,0u:zi'aestik/   | BrE /in,0ju:zi'aestik/   |
| duty           | AmE /'durti/            | BrE /'dju:ti/            |
| tune           | AmE /tu:n/              | BrE /tju:n/              |
| new            | AmE /nu:/               | BrE /nju:/               |
| illuminate     | AmE /ilurmineit/        | BrE /I'ljurmineit/       |

h Words ending in unstressed -He (e.g. fertile, reptile, missile,
senile) are pronounced with /ail/ in British English; some are
pronounced with /l/ in American English.

fertile AmE /'f3:rtl/ (rhyming with turtle)

BrE /'f3:tail/ (rhyming with her tile)

i Some long words ending in -ary, -ery or -ory are pronounced
differently, with one more syllable in American English. secretary AmE
/'sekrateri/ BrE /'sekratri/

j Borough and thorough are pronounced differently.

AmE /'bArou, '0atou/

BrE /'bAra, '0Ara/

k Words borrowed from French are often stressed differently, especially
if their pronunciation ends with a vowel sound. The final vowel is
usually stressed in American English but not in British English. pate
AmE /pae'tei/ BrE /'paetei/ ballet AmE /bae'lei/ BrE /'baelei/

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark72>>52 and

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark73>>1    use

When we join two or more grammatically similar expressions, we usually
put and before the last. bread and cheese We drank, talked and danced.

I wrote the letters, Peter addressed them, George bought the stamps and
Alice posted them.

And is sometimes left out in a very literary or poetic style, but this
is unusual. My dreams are full of darkness, despair, death.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark74>>2    fixed expressions

Some common expressions with and have a fixed order which cannot be
changed. The shortest expression often comes first. bread and butter
(not butter and bread) hands and knees (not knees and hands) young and
pretty thunder and lightning black and white cup and saucer knife and
fork Note: and is usually pronounced /and/, not /aend/ (see 616).

For and with adjectives, see 16.

For rules about the use of commas, see 476.

For ellipsis after and, in expressions like a knife and (a) fork, the
bread and (the) butter, see 178. For singular and plural verbs after
subjects with and, see 527.5.

For and after try, wait, go, come etc, see 53.

For both ... and, see ill.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark75>>53    and after try, wait, go etc

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark76>>1    try/be sure / wait and...

We often use and... instead of to after try /be sure. This is informal.

Try and eat something - you'll feel better if you do. rU try and phone
you tomorrow morning.

Be sure and ask Uncle Joe about his garden.

Note also the common expression Wait and see.

What's for lunch?~ Wait and see.

We only use this structure with the simple base forms try / be sure /
wait. It is not possible, for example, with tries_{t} trying, was sure
or waited. Compare:

Try and eat something.

I tried to eat something, (not J-tried-and ate-sometMng.)

We waited to see what would happen, (not We waked artd-saw-...)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark77>>2    come/go/etc and...

Come and..., go and..., run and..., hurry up and..., stay and... are
often used informally.

Come and have a drink.

Stay and have dinner. Hurry up and open the door.

With these verbs, the structure is not only used with the base form.

He often comes and spends the evening with us.

She stayed and played with the children. She thought of going and
getting him.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark78>>3    American English

In informal American English, and is sometimes dropped after the base
forms go and come.

Let's go see if Anne's home.

Go jump in the river. Come sit on my lap.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark79>>54    another and other(s)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark80>>1    spelling of another

Another is one word.

He's bought another car. (not ... an other car.)

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark81>>2    'additional, extra'

Another can mean ‘an additional, extra'. It is used with singular
countable nouns.

Could I have another piece of bread?

Another can be used without a noun, or with one, if the meaning is clear
from what has come before.

Those cakes are wonderful. Could I have another (one)?

With uncountable and plural nouns, we normally use more, not other, with
this meaning.

Would you like some more meat? (not ... other meat?)    >

Would you like some more peas? (not ... other-peas?^{1})

However, we can use another before a plural noun in expressions with few
or a number.

Ym staying for another few weeks. We need another three chairs.

For other cases where a(n) is followed by a plural, see 532.6.

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark82>>3    'alternative'

(An)other can also mean '(an) alternative', ‘besides / instead of
this/these'.

I think we should paint it another colour.

Have you got any other cakes, or are these the only ones?

Other people often means ‘people besides oneself.

Why dorit you think more about other people?

<<main-4.xhtml#bookmark83>>4    other and others

When other is used with a noun it has no plural form.

Where are the other photos? (not ... the others photos?)

But used alone, without a noun, it can have a plural form.

Yve got one lot of photos. Where are the others?

These are too small Have you got any others?

Normally, other(s) is only used alone if it refers to a noun that has
been mentioned before. An exception is the common plural use of (the)
others to mean (the) other people.

He never thinks of others. Jake's arrived -1 must tell the others. but
not On the phone,onecannot see theother o r He never listens to another,

<<main-5.xhtml>>

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark0>>5    not used like an adjective

Other is a determiner or pronoun; it is not used exacdy like an
adjective. So it cannot normally have an adverb before it, or be used
after a link verb.

Yd prefer a completely different colour. (not ... a-completely other
colour) You look different with a beard (not You-loek-other-...)

For one another, see 171.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark1>>55 any

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark2>>1 meaning

Any is a determiner (see 154). It generally suggests an indefinite
amount or number, and is used when it is not important to say how
much/many we are thinking of. Because of its ‘open', non-specific
meaning, any is often used in questions and negative clauses, and in
other cases where there is an idea of doubt or negation.

Have you got any biscuits?

We didn't have any problems going through customs You never give me any
help.

The noise of the party stopped me getting any sleep.

I suddenly realised Yd come out without any money Any is common after if
If you find any blackberries, keep some for me.

Sometimes any means ‘if there is/are any* or ‘whatever there is/are'.

Any fog will clear by noon. (= If there is any fog, it will clear by
noon.) Perhaps you could correct any mistakes I've made.

Any can be used to emphasise the idea of open choice: *it doesn't matter
who/ what/which'.

You can borrow any book you like.

For details of this use, see paragraph 5 below.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark3>>2    any and some

Any often contrasts with some, which is most common in affirmative
clauses. Compare:

I need some razor blades.    Have you got any razor blades?

Sorry, I haven't got any razor blades For details of the difference, see
547.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark4>>3    any and not any

Any alone does not have a negative meaning. It is only negative when
used with not.

She's unhappy because she hasn't got any friends. (not ..
.-becauseshe-has got any friends.)

No (see 376) means the same as not any, but is more emphatic.

She's got no friends.

Not any cannot begin a sentence; no is used instead.

No cigarette is harmless, (not Not any cigarette-...)

No tourists came to the town that year.

We do not usually use not any with singular countable nouns.

She hasn't got a job. (not She hasn't got-any job.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark5>>4    nouns with and without any

With an uncountable or plural noun, any usually suggests the idea of an
indefinite amount or indefinite number. Compare:

-    Is there any water in that can?

Is there water on the moon? (The interest is in the existence of water,
not its amount.)

-    Dad hasn't got any hair (He has lost the amount he had.)

Birds have feathers, not hair. (No idea of amount.)

-    None of her children have got any sense. (Not even a small amount.)

Ann looks like her mother, but she hasn't got blue eyes. (not. .. she
hasn't got any blue eyes - people have a definite number of eyes: two.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark6>>5    any = 'it doesn't matter who/which/what'

Any can be used to emphasise the idea of free choice, with the meaning
of *it doesn't matter who /which /what'. With this meaning, any is
common in affirmative clauses as well as questions and negatives, and is
often used with singular countable nouns as well as uncountables and
plurals. In speech, it is stressed.

Ask any doctor - they'll all tell you that alcohol is a poison.

She goes out with any boy who asks her.

When shall I come? ~ Any time.

We can use just any if necessary to make the meaning clear.    ►

I don't do Just any work -1 choose jobs that interest me.

(/ don't do any work ... could be misunderstood.)

Note that we use either (see 174), not any, to talk about a choice
between two alternatives.

I can write with either hand, (not ... any hand.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark7>>6    at all

At all (see 83) is often used to emphasise the meaning of (not) any.

Ill do any job at all - even road-sweeping.

She doesn't speak any English at alL

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark8>>7    any and any of

Before a determiner (definite article, demonstrative or possessive word)
or a pronoun, we use any of {see 154.4) Compare:

-    I didn't go to any lectures last term. (not ... any of lectures...)

I wasn't interested in any of the lectures, (not ... any the lectures:)

-    Do any books here belong to you?

Do any of these books belong to you?

-    I don't think any staff want to work tomorrow.

I don't think any of us want to work tomorrow.

Note that when any of is followed by a plural subject, the verb can be
singular or plural. A singular verb is more common in a formal style.

If any of your friends is/are interested, let me know.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark9>>8    without a noun

A noun can be dropped after any, if the meaning is clear.

Did you get the oil?~ No, there wasn't any left.

Instead of not any without a noun, none (see 376) can be used. This is
often more emphatic.

There was none left.

We don't use any or not any alone as answers.

What day shall I come?~Any day. (not Any.)

How much money have you got?~None, (not Not any.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark10>>9    compounds

Many of the rules given above also apply to the compounds anybody,
anyone, anything and anywhere. For more information about these, see
548.

For the use of any and no as adverbs, see 57.

For any... but, see 116.

For any and every, see 56.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark11>>56 any and every

Any and every can both be used to talk in general about all the members
of a class or group.

Any/Every child can learn to swim.

The meaning is not quite the same. Any looks at things one at a time: it
means 'whichever one you choose', ‘this or that or the other'. Every
looks at things together its meaning is closer to 'all', 'this and that
and the other'. Compare:

Which newspaper would you like? ~ It doesn't matter. Any one. (= one or
another or another) (not ... Every one.)

On the stand there were newspapers and magazines of every kind. (= one
and another and another) (not .. -magazines of any kind.)

For more information about any, see 55.

For every, see 193.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark12>>57    any and no: adverbs

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark13>>1    any and no with comparatives

Any can modify comparatives. This happens mostly in questions and
negative sentences, and after if (see also 381).

Can you go any faster?

You don't look any older than your daughter. (= You don't look at all
older...)

were any younger, Vd fall in love with you.

No can also be used in this way (but not some).

Vm afraid the weather's no better than yesterday.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark14>>2    any/no different

We can also use any and no with different.

This school isn't any different from the last one.

Is John any better? ~ No different. Still very ill

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark15>>3    any/no good; any/no use

Note the expressions any good/use and no good/use.

Was the Jilm any good? This watch is no use. It keeps stopping:

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark16>>58    appear

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark17>>1    link verb: 'seem'

Appear can be a link verb (see 328), used to say how things look or
seem. It is used in similar ways to seem (see 507 for details), but is
less frequent, especially in an informal style.

With this meaning, appear is followed by adjectives, not adverbs. We can
use appear or appear to be.

He appears (to be) very angry today. (not Hettppears-very
angrily-todoy.) Before nouns we generally use appear to be.

It appears to be some kind of bomb.

The boys on the bus appeared to be students.

Structures with preparatory there (see 587) or it (see 446) are
possible.

There appears to be a problem with the oil pressure.

It appears that we may be mistaken.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark18>>2    appear and seem: differences

Seem can be used to talk both about objective facts and about subjective
impressions and feelings (see 507 for examples). Appear is mosdy used to
talk about objective facts. Compare:

The baby seems/appears (to be) hungry.

She doesn't want to go on studying. It seems a pity. (not It appears a
pity.) Seem is often used with like. This is not normal with appear.

It seemed like a good idea. (More natural than It appeared like a good
idea.) Seem can be used in a special structure with can't (see 507,4).
This is not possible with appear.

I can't seem to make him understand, (but not I cari-t appear to make
him understand.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark19>>3 'come into sight'

Appear can also mean 'come into sight' or 'arrive'. In this case it can
be modified by an adverb.

She suddenly appeared in the doorway.

For structures with look, see 331.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark20>>59    arise and rise

Arise means 'begin*, 'appear*, 'occur*, 'come to one's notice*. It is
used mostly with abstract nouns as subjects.

A discussion arose about the best way to pay.

I'm afraid a difficulty has arisen.

Rise usually means 'get higher*, 'come/go up'.

Prices keep rising.    What time does the sun rise?

My hopes are rising.

Note that we usually say that people get up in the morning. Rise is only
used with this meaning in a very formal style.

Arise and rise are irregular verbs.

(a)rise - (a)rose - (a)risen

For the difference between me and raise, see 304.2.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark21>>60    (a)round and about

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark22>>1    circular movement etc: (a)round

We use both round and around (AmE usually around) for movement or
position in a circle or a curve.

She walked (a)round the car and looked at the wheels.

I'd like to travel (a)round the world.

Where do you live?Just (a)round the comer.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark23>>2    touring; distribution: round

We also use round or around (AmE usually around) to talk about going to
all (or most) parts of a place, or giving things to everybody in a
group.

We walked (a)round the old part of the town.

Can I look (a)round? Could you pass the cups (a)round, please?

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark24>>3    indefinite movement and position

We use around or about (AmE usually around) to refer to movements or
positions that are not very clear or definite: ‘here and there', ‘in
lots of places', ‘in different parts of, ‘somewhere in' and similar
ideas.

The children were running around/about everywhere.

Stop standing around/about and do some work.

Where's John?~ Somewhere around/about.

I like doing odd jobs around/about the house.

We also use these words in some common expressions to talk about
time-wasting or silly activity.

Stop fooling around/about. We're late.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark25>>4    approximately: about

About (less often around) can mean 'approximately', ‘not exactly*.

There were aboutiaround fifty people there.

What time shall I come?~ About/Around eight

For other uses of these words, see a good dictionary.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark26>>61 articles (1): introduction

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark27>>1    What are articles?

Articles are small words that are often used at the beginning of noun
phrases. There are two: the (the 'definite article') and a!an (the
‘indefinite article'). They belong to a group of words called
‘determiners* (see 154).

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    What are articles used for?

Articles can show whether we are talking about things that are known
both to the speaker/writer and to the listener/reader (‘definite'), or
that are not known to them both (‘indefinite').

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark29>>3    How much do articles matter?

The correct use of the articles is one of the most difficult points in
English grammar. Fortunately, most article mistakes do not matter too
much. Even if we leave all the articles out of a sentence, it can
usually be understood.

Please can you lend me pound of butter till end of week?

However, it is better to use the articles correcdy if possible. Sections
62-70 give the most important rules and exceptions.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark30>>4    speakers of Western European languages

Most languages of Western European origin, and one or two others, have
article systems quite like English. However, there are some differences
in the way articles are used in English and these other languages. The
most important differences are explained in Section 63. Students should
read this first if they speak one of the following languages perfecdy or
very well: French, German, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Icelandic,
Spanish, Catalan, Italian, Portuguese, Greek, Romanian. There is more
detailed information on difficult points in Sections 64-70.    ►

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark31>>5 speakers of other languages

If a student's language is one (e.g. Russian or Japanese) that is not
listed in paragraph 4, he or she may have more difficulty with the
correct use of articles. The most important rules are explained in
Section 62, and students should read this first. There is more detailed
information on difficult points in Sections 64-70.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark32>>62 articles (2): basic information (A)

(This Section is for students who speak languages (e.g. Russian or
Japanese) that do not have articles like English a!an and the. Students
who speak languages which have articles (e.g. German or Portuguese)
should read Section 63.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark33>>1 two basic rules

•    To say ‘You know which I mean', we put the before a noun.

I've been to the doctor. (You know which one: my doctor.)

Have you fed the dogs? (You know which ones I mean.)

Could you pass the salt? (You can see the salt that I want.)

•    When we can't say ‘You know which I mean', we:

-    put a/an before a singular countable noun (see 65).

There's a rat in the kitchenI I need an envelope.

-    put no article with a plural or uncountable noun.

She's afraid of rats. I need help.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark34>>2 four common mistakes to avoid

• Don't use a!an with plural or uncountable nouns. John collects stamps,
(not .. . a stamps:)

Our garden needs water. (not .. .-a-water.)

•    Don't use the to talk about things in general. The does not mean
'all^{1}.

(For exceptions, see 68.2.)

Elephants can swim very well (not The elephants can-swim-...)

Petrol is expensive. (not The petrol...)

•    Don't use articles together with my, this, or other determiners.

my work (not the-my-work) this problem (not the-this problem) a friend
of mine (not a my friend)

•    Don't use singular countable nouns alone, without an article or
other determiner. We can say a cat, the cat, my cat, this cat, any cat,
either cat or every cat, but not just cat. (For exceptions, see 70.)

Give it to the cat (not Give it-to cat)

Annie is a doctor, (not Annie is doctor.)

For more detailed information about articles, see the following
sections.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark35>>63    articles (3): basic information (B)

(This Section is for students who speak a language that has articles:
e.g. French, German, Swedish, Norwegian, Spanish, Italian, Greek. If you
speak a language without articles - for example Russian or Japanese -
read Section 62.)

Articles are often used in similar ways in English and other languages,
but there are some differences. The most important are as follows.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    talking in general

In English, when we are talking about people or things in general, we do
not usually use the with uncountable or plural nouns.

Life is complicated. (not The ltfe -h complicated.)

My sister loves horses, (not ... the-horses0

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    talking about jobs, types etc

In English, we normally put a/an with a singular noun that is used for
classifying - saying what job somebody has, what class, group or type
somebody or something belongs to, what we use something for, etc.

She's a dentist (not Ske\^s-denMst.)

Vm looking forward to being a grandmother.

I used my shoe as a hammer.

For more detailed information about articles, see the following
Sections.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark38>>64    articles (4): more about the

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark39>>1 the = 'you know which one(s)'

The usually means something like ‘you know which I mean*. We use the
before a noun (singular, plural or uncountable) when our listener/reader
knows (or can easily see) which particular person(s), thing(s) etc we
are talking about. Compare:

-    Vm going to the post office. (The listener knows which: the usual
one.)

Is there a post office near here? (Any post office.)

-    I didn't like the film. (The one that the speaker and listener
saw.)

Let's go and see a film. (The speaker doesn't say which one.)    ►

-    She arrived on the 8.15 train. (The speaker says which train.)

She arrived in an old taxi. (The speaker doesn't say which taxi.)

-    Did you wash the clothes? (The listener knows which clothes.)

I need to buy clothes. (The listener does not know which clothes.)

-    What did you do with the coffee I bought? (The speaker says which
coffee.) I don't drink coffee. (Any coffee.)

Our listener/reader may know which one(s) we mean because:

a we have mentioned it/them before

She's got two children: a boy and a girl. The boy's fourteen and the
girls eight

So what did you do then? ~ Gave the money straight back to the
policeman. (The listener has already heard about the money and the
policeman.)

b we say which one(s) we mean

Who are the girls over there with John?

Tell Pat the story about John and Susie. Ill try the green shirt.

c it is clear from the situation which one(s) we mean Could you close
the door? (Only one door is open.)

Ann's in the kitchen.    Could you feed the dogs?

Did you enjoy the party? What's the time?

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark40>>2    the = 'the only one(s) around'

The listener may know which one we mean because there is no choice -
there is only one (e.g. the sun_{t} the moon, the earth_{t} the world,
the universe, the future) or there is only one in our part of the world
(e.g. the government).

I haven't seen the sun for days. Do you trust the government?

People used to think the earth was flat.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark41>>3    superlatives

We usually use the with superlatives (see 141-146) because there is
normally only one best, biggest etc individual or group (so it is clear
which one(s) we are talking about). For the same reason, we usually use
the with first, next, last, same and only.

I'm the oldest in my family: Can I have the next pancake?

We went to the same school.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark42>>4    the meaning 'the well-known'

After a name, an identifying expression with the is often used to make
it clear that the person referred to is ‘the well-known one*.

She married Richard Burton, the actor.

I'd like you to meet Cathy Parker, the novelist.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark43>>5    possessives and demonstratives

We do not use the with possessives or demonstratives.

This is my uncle. (not ... the my unde:)

Is that Mary's car? (not ... the Mary^{f}s car?)

I like this beer, (not ... the this beer.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark44>>6    proper nouns (names)

We do not usually use the with singular proper nouns (there are some
exceptions - see 70.17-18).

Mary lives in Switzerland. (not The Mary lives in thc-SmtzeriancL)

But note the use of the (pronounced /6i:/) with a person's name to mean
'the well-known'.

My name's James Bond. ~ What, not the James Bond?

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark45>>7    things in general

We usually use no article, not the, to talk about things in general -
the does not mean ‘all'. (For details and exceptions, see 68.)

Books are expensive, (not -The books are expensive.)

Life is hard, (not The life is hard.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark46>>8    pronunciation

The is normally pronounced /5i:/ before a vowel and /5a/ before a
consonant. Compare:

the ice /5i: ais/    the snow /5a snau/

The choice between /5i:/ and /5a/ depends on pronunciation, not
spelling. We pronounce /5i:/ before a vowel sound, even if it is written
as a consonant.

the hour /5i: 'aua(r)/ the MP /5i: em 'piif And we pronounce /6a/ before
a consonant sound, even if it is written as a vowel.

the university /5a juini'V3:sati/

the one-pound coin /5a ‘WAn 'paond 'kom/

We sometimes pronounce a stressed /5i:/ before a hesitation, or when we
want to stress the following word, even if it begins with a consonant.

He's the /5i:/ - just a moment - deputy assistant vice-president.

I've found the /5i:/ present for Angela!

For the town, the country, the sea, the mountains, etc, see 69.4.

For on the bus, at the hairdresser's, etc, see 69.5.

For other advanced points, see 69.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark47>>65 articles (5): more about a/an

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark48>>1 countable and uncountable nouns

Countable nouns are the names of separate objects, people, ideas etc
which we can count. a cat - three cats a secretary ~ four secretaries a
plan - two plans

Uncountable nouns are the names of materials, liquids and other things
which we do not usually see as separate objects. wool (but not a-wool,
two-wools) water (but not tt-water, three waters) weather (but not a
weather, four weathers) energy (but not an energy, severed-energies)

For more detailed information, see 148-149.    ►

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark49>>2    a/an with singular countable nouns

We normally use afan only with singular countable nouns. a secretary an
office but not a salt or an-offtces

For expressions like a good two hours, see 532.6.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark50>>3    uses of a/an

Alan does not add much to the meaning of a noun - it is like a weak form
of ‘one'. It has severed common uses.

a one person or thing

We can use a!an when we talk about one person or thing.

There's a police car outside.

My brother's married to a doctor. Andy lives in an old house. b any one
member of a class.

We can use a!an when we talk about any one member of a class.

A doctor must like people. (= any doctor)

I would like to live in an old house. (= any old house)

c classifying and defining

We can use at an when we classify or define people and things - when we
say what they are, what job they do, or what they are used for.

She's a doctor.

I'm looking forward to being a grandmother.

A glider is a plane with no engine.

Don't use your plate as an ashtray.

d descriptions

A/an is common before nouns that are used in descriptions.

She's a nice person.    That was a lovely evening.

He's got a friendly face. It's an extremely hot day.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark51>>4    when a/an cannot be left out

We do not normally leave out a!an in negative expressions, after
prepositions or after fractions.

Lend me your pen. ~I haven't got a pen. (not I haven't got pen.)

You mustn't go out without a coat, (not ... without coat) three-quarters
of a pound (not three-quarters of pound)

And we do not leave out a!an when we say what jobs people have, or how
things are used (see above).

She's an engineer. (not She-s-engineer.)

I used my shoe as a hammer, (not ... as hammer.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark52>>5    when a/an is not used: adjectives alone;
possessives

Alan cannot normally be used with an adjective alone (without a noun).
Compare:

It's a good car. It's good (not It's a good.)

Alan cannot be used together with a possessive. Instead, we can use the
structure a ... of mine/yours etc (see 443).

He's a friend of mine, (not He's a my friend.)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark53>>6    a/an and the

Instead of a!an, we use the when we want to say ‘You and I both know
which one I mean'. Compare:

She lives in a big house. (The hearer doesn't know which one.)

She lives in the big house over there. (The hearer knows which one.)

For details, see 64.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark54>>7    a and an: the difference

We do not normally pronounce the sound /a/ before a vowel. So before a
vowel, the article a (/a/) changes to an. Compare:

a rabbit    a lemon    an elephant    an orange

The choice between a and an depends on pronunciation, not spelling. We
use an before a vowel sound, even if it is written as a consonant.

an hour /an 'auar/ an MP /an em 'pi:/

And we use a before a consonant sound, even if it is written as a vowel.

a university /a junu'v3:sati/ a one-pound coin /a 'WAn .../

Some people say an, not a, before words beginning with h if the first
syllable is unstressed.

an hotel (a hotel is more common)

an historic occasion (a historic ... is more common)

(but not an housewife- - the first syllable is stressed.)

A is sometimes pronounced /ei/ before a hesitation, when we want to
emphasise the following word, or when we want to make a contrast with
the. I think III have a /ei/ - chocolate ice cream.

It's a /ei/ reason - its not the only reason.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark55>>66 articles (6): no article with plural and
uncountable nouns

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark56>>1    a/an not used

Plural and uncountable nouns (e.g. cats, wool - see 65.1) cannot
normally be used with a/an (because a/an has a similar meaning to
'one'). Instead, we most often use no article.

There were cats in every room, (not .. .-a-cats-...)

Doctors generally work long hours. He's got very big ears.

Her coat is made of pure wool What's that? --- / think it's pepper

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark57>>2    confusing nouns

Some nouns that are countable in some other languages are uncountable in
English (see 148.3 for a list).

I need information and advice, (not ... an information and an advice)
You've made very good progress, (not ... a very-good progress.)    ►

articles (7): the difference between some/any and no article 67

And note that we never use a/an with weather or English.

We're having terrible weather, (not ...■ a terrible weather:)

She speaks very good English. (not ... a very good English:)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark58>>3    some and any

Instead of no article, we can sometimes use some or any.

We met some nice French girls on holiday.

Have you got any matches?

For details, see 67.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark59>>4    the

Instead of no article, we use the when we want to say ‘You and I both
know which I mean* (see 64). Compare:

-    I'm working with children. (The hearer doesn't know which ones.)

How are the children? (= the hearer's children)

-    We need salt. (= any salt)

Could you pass the salt? (The hearer can see the salt that is wanted.)

But we usually use no article, not the, to talk about people, things etc
in general (see 68).

Are dogs more intelligent than cats? (not .. -the-dogs-... the cats)
Everybody likes music. (not ... the music.)

For expressions like a coffee, a knowledge of Spanish, see 148.4, 6.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark60>>67 articles (7): the difference between
some/any and no article

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark61>>1    use with uncountable and plural nouns

Uncountable and plural nouns can often be used either with some!any or
with no article. There is not always a great difference of meaning.

We need (some) cheese. I didn't buy (any) eggs.

Some is used especially in affirmative sentences; any is more common in
questions and negatives (for details, see 547).

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark62>>2    some/any or no article?

We prefer some!any when we are thinking about limited but rather
indefinite numbers or quantities - when we don't know, care or say
exactly how much/ many. We prefer no article when we are thinking about
unlimited numbers or quantities, or not thinking about
numbers/quantities at all. Compare:

-    We've planted some roses in the garden. (A limited number; the
speaker

doesn't say how many.)

I like roses. (No idea of number.)

-    We got talking to some students. (A limited number.)

Our next-door neighbours are students. (The main idea is classification,
not number.)

-    I've just bought some books on computing. (A limited number.)

There were books on the desk, on the floor, on the chairs,... (A large

number.)

-    Would you like some more rice? (An indefinite amount - as much as
the

listener wants.)

We need rice, sugar, eggs, butter, beer, and toilet paper: (The speaker
is thinking just of the things that need to be bought, not of the
amounts.)

-    Is there any water in the fridge? (The speaker wants a limited
amount.)

Is there water on the moon? (The interest is in the existence of water,
not the amount.)

-    This engine hardly uses any petrol. (The interest is in the
amount.)

This engine doesn't use petrol (The interest is in the type of fuel, not
the amount.)

We do not use some! any when it is clear exactly how much /many we are
talking about. Compare:

-    You've got some great books.

You've got pretty toes. (A definite number - ten. You've got some pretty
toes would suggest that the speaker is not making it clear how many
-perhaps six or seven!)

For details of the difference between some and any, see 547.

For full details of the uses of some, see 546; for any, see 55.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark63>>68 articles (8): talking in general

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark64>>1    the does not mean 'all'

We do not use the with uncountable or plural nouns to talk about things
in general - to talk about all books, all people or all life, for
example. The does not mean ‘all*. Instead, we use no article. Compare:

-    Move the books off that chair and sit down. (= particular books)

Books are expensive, (not The-books-are expensive.)

-    I'm studying the life of Beethoven. (= one particular life)

Life is complicated, (not The-iife...)

-    Where's the cheese?~ / ate it. - Why has the light gone out?

I love cheese.    Nothing can travel faster than light.

-    I've joined the local Dramatic Society.

It's not always easy to fit in with society.

-    I never really understood the nature of my father's work.

She's very interested in nature, especially animals and birds.

-    Write your name in the space at the bottom of the page.

Would you like to travel into space?

Note that most (meaning ‘the majority of) is used without the.

Most birds can fly. (not The most...)

Most of the children got very tired, (not The most...)

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark65>>2    generalisations with singular countable
nouns

Sometimes we talk about things in general by using the with a singular
countable noun.

Schools should concentrate more on the child and less on exams.

This is common with the names of scientific instruments and inventions,
and musical instruments.

Life would be quieter without the telephone.

The violin is more difficult than the piano.    ►

We can also generalise by talking about one example of a class, using
a!an (meaning ‘any') with a singular countable noun.

A baby deer can stand as soon as it's bom.

A child needs plenty of love.

Note that we cannot use a!an in this way when we are generalising about
all of the members of a group together.

The tiger is in danger of becoming extinct, (not A-tiger-is-in danger of
becoming extinct. The sentence is about the whole tiger family, not
about individuals.)

Do you like horses? (not Do-you-Hke-a-horse?)

For the use of the + adjective to generalise about groups (e.g. the old,
the blind) see 17.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark66>>69 articles (9): the (difficult cases)

It is sometimes difficult to know whether or not to use the. For
example, we use no article to generalise with uncountable and plural
words (see 68); but we use the to show that the listener/reader knows
which people or things we are talking about (see 64). Sometimes both
these meanings come together, and it is difficult to know which form is
correct. The grammatical distinctions in this area are not very clear;
often the same idea can be expressed both with the and with no article.
The following notes may help.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark67>>1    groups: nurses or the nurses; railways
or the railways?

When we generalise about members of a group, we usually use no article.
But if we talk about the group as a whole - as if it was a well-known
unit - we are more likely to use the. Compare:

-    Nurses mostly work very hard    - Stars vary greatly in size

The nurses have never gone on strike. The stars are really bright
tonight.

-    Farmers often vote Conservative.

What has this government done for the farmers?

-    It's difficult for railways to make a profit, (any railways)

The railways are getting more and more unreliable, (our well-known
railways)

This often happens when we talk about nationalities. Compare:

New Zealanders don't like to be mistaken for Australians The Australians
suffered heavy losses in the First World War.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark68>>2    French painters; the Impressionists

We are more likely to use the if we are talking about a ‘closed' group
or class with a relatively definite, limited number of members. Compare:

-    French painters (a large, indefinite group)

the Impressionists (a particular artistic movement; we know more or less
who belonged to the group)

-    19th-century poets

the Romantic poets (Shelley, Keats, Byron, Wordsworth and a few others)

-    British comprehensive schools

the British 'Public Schools' (a limited group of expensive high-prestige
schools)

Specialists are likely to use the for groups or classes that they study
or know about. Compare:

Metals are mostly shiny.

Next term we're going to study the metals in detail

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark69>>3    1960s music, the music of the 1960s

Some expressions are 'half-general' - in the middle between general and
particular. If we talk about 1960s music, eighteenth-century history or
poverty in Britain, we are not talking about all music, history or
poverty, but these are still rather general ideas (compared with the
music we heard last night, the history I did at school or the poverty I
grew up in). In these ‘half-general' expressions, we usually use no
article. However, the is often used when the noun is followed by a
limiting, defining phrase, especially one with of. Compare:

- 1960s music    - African butterflies

the music of the 1960s the butterflies of Africa

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark70>>4    physical environment: the town, the sea

The is used with a number of rather general expressions referring to our
physical environment - the world around us and its climate. The suggests
that everybody is familiar with what we are talking about. Examples are:
the town, the country, the mountains, the sea, the seaside, the wind,
the rain, the weather, the sunshine, the night.

My wife likes the seaside, but I prefer the mountains British people
talk about the weather a lot.

I love listening to the wind.

But note that no article is used with nature, society or space when
these have a ‘general' meaning (see 68).

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark71>>5    on the bus; at the hairdresser

We use the (with a singular countable noun) when we talk about some
kinds of thing that are part of everybody's lives, like 'the bus' or
‘the hairdresser'. In this case the bus, for example, does not mean ‘one
bus that you know about'; we use the to suggest that taking a bus is a
common experience that we all share. I have some of my best ideas when
I'm on the bus.

Most of my friends go to the hairdresser two or three times a month.

Do you sing in the bath?

I've stopped reading the newspaper because it's too depressing.

For similar expressions with no article (e.g. in bed, in hospital), see
70.1.

<<main-5.xhtml#bookmark72>>6    She kicked him on the knee; He sat at
the side

We sometimes use the even when it is not exactly clear which of several
particular persons or things we are talking about. This can happen when
there are several similar possibilities, and it is unnecessary to be
more definite. Lying by the side of the road we saw the wheel of a car.

(not ... a wheel of a-ear:)

John Perkins is the son of a rich banker, (who may have more than one
son) She kicked him on the knee.    ►

The is often used like this with side and wrong.

I usually sit at the side in church. He's the wrong man for me.

(on the phone) Vm sorry. You've got a/the wrong number.

<<main-6.xhtml>>

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark0>>70 articles (10): special rules and exceptions

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark1>>1    common expressions without articles

In some common fixed expressions to do with place, time and movement,
normally countable nouns are treated as uncountables, without articles.
Examples are:

to!at! inIfrom school/ university!college

tolatlinlintolfrom church tofinfintofout of bed/prison

tolinlintolout of hospital (BrE) tofatffrom work

to/at sea tolinlfrom town

atlfrom home leave home

leavefstartlenter school/university/college

by day at night

by carlbuslbicyclefplaneftrairi/tube/boat on foot by
radiolphonelletterhnail With place nouns, expressions with or without
articles may have different meanings. Compare:

-    I met her at college, (when we were students)

I'll meet you at the college. (The college is just a meeting place.)

-    Jane's in hospitaL (as a patient)

I left my coat in the hospital when I was visiting Jane.

-    Who smokes in class? (= ... in the classroom?)

Who in the class smokes? (= Who is a smoker ...?)

In American English, university and hospital are not used without
articles. She was unhappy at the university.

Say that again and I'll put you in the hospitaL

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    double expressions

Articles are often dropped in double expressions, particularly with
prepositions.

with knife and fork on land and sea day after day with hat and coat arm
in arm    husband and wife

from top to bottom inch by inch

For cases tike the bread and (the) butter, see 178.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    possessive's

Nouns lose their articles after possessive's.

the coat that belongs to John = John's coat (not John's the coat or
the-Johris

Ct/Cuj

the economic problems of America = America's economic problems (not the
America's economic problems)

But the possessive noun itself may have an article. the wife of the boss
= the boss's wife

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark4>>4    noun modifiers

When a noun modifies another noun, the first noun's article is dropped.
lessons in how to play the guitar = guitar lessons a spot on the sun = a
sunspot

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark5>>5    both and all

We often leave out the after both.

Both (the) children are good at maths.

And we often leave out the between all and a number.

All (the) three brothers were arrested.

We usually leave out the after all in all day_{f} all night, all week,
all year, all winter and all summer.

He's been away all week. I haven't seen her all day.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark6>>6    kind of etc

We usually leave out a! an after kind of, sort of type of and similar
expressions (see 551).

What kind of (a) person is she?

Have you got a cheaper sort of radio?

They've developed a new variety of sheep.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark7>>7    amount and number

The is dropped after the amountfnumber of

I was surprised at the amount of money collected.. (not ... of the
money) The number of unemployed is rising steadily.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark8>>8    man and woman

Unlike other singular countable nouns, man and woman can be used in a
general sense without articles.

Man and woman were created equal.

But we more often use a woman and a man, or men and women.

A woman without a man is like a fish without a bicycle, (old feminist
joke) Men and women have similar abilities and needs.

Man is also commonly used to mean ‘the human race', though many people
regard this usage as sexist and prefer to avoid it (see 222.6).

How did Man first discover fire?

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark9>>9    days, months and seasons

We drop the when we mean 'the day/month before or after this one*.

Where were you last Saturday? See you on Thursday.

I was away in April    We're moving next September.

To talk about the seasons in general, we can say spring or the spring,
summer or the summer, etc. There is little difference.

Rome is lovely in (the) spring. I like (the) winter best When we are
talking about particular springs, summers etc, we are more likely to use
the.

I worked very hard in the summer that year.    ►

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark10>>10    musical instruments

We often use the + singular when we talk about musical instruments in
general, or about playing musical instruments.

The violin is really difficult    Who's that on the piano?

But the is often dropped when talking about jazz or pop, and sometimes
when talking about classical music.

This recording was made with Miles Davis on trumpet.

She studied oboe and saxophone at the Royal Academy of Music.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark11>>11    (the) radio, (the) cinema, (the)
theatre and television

When we talk about our use of these forms of entertainment, we generally
say the radio, the cinema, the theatre, but television or TV.

I always listen to the radio while I'm driving.

It was a great treat to go to the cinema or the theatre when I was a
child. Whafs on TV?

The is often dropped in all four cases when we talk about these
institutions as art forms or professions.

Cinema is different from theatre in several ways.

He's worked in radio and television all his life.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark12>>12    jobs and positions

The is not used in titles like Queen Elizabeth, President Lincoln.
Compare: Queen Elizabeth had dinner with President Kennedy The Queen had
dinner with the President And the is not usually used in the complement
of a sentence, when we say that somebody has or gains a unique position
(the only one in the organisation). Compare:

- They appointed him Head Librarian. - He was elected President in 1879.
Where's the librarian?    I want to see the President

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark13>>13    exclamations

We use a!an with singular countable nouns in exclamations after What
What a lovely dress! (not What lovely dress!)

Note that a!an cannot be used in exclamations with uncountable nouns.
What nonsense! (not What a nonsense!)

What luckI

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark14>>14    illnesses

The names of illnesses and pains are usually uncountable, with no
article, in standard British English (for more details, see 148.7).

Have you had appendicitis? I've got toothache again.

Alan is used in a few cases such as a cold, a headache.

I've got a horrible cold.    Have you got a headache?

The can be used informally with a few common illnesses.

I think I've got (the) flu. She's never had (the) measles.

American usage is different in some cases.

I've got a toothache / an earache / a backache / a stomachache. (BrE
I've got toothache/earache etc)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark15>>15    parts of the body etc

When talking about parts of someone's body, or about their possessions,
we usually use possessives, not the.

Katy broke her arm climbing. (not Katy broke the arm climbing.)

He stood in the doorway, his coat over his arm. (not ... the coat over
the arm:)

But the is common after prepositions, especially when we are talking
about blows, pains and other things that often happen to parts of
people's bodies. She hit him in the stomach. He was shot in the leg.

Can't you look me in the eye?

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark16>>16    measurements

Note the use of the in measuring expressions beginning with by Do you
sell eggs by the kilo or by the dozen?

He sits watching TV by the hour.    Can I pay by the month?

Alan is used to relate one measuring unit to another.

sixty pence a kilo thirty miles an hour twice a week

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark17>>17    place names

We use the with these kinds of place names:

•    seas (the Atlantic)

•    mountain groups (the Himalayas)

•    island groups [the West Indies)

•    rivers (the Rhine)

•    deserts [the Sahara)

•    most hotels (the Grand Hotel)

9 most cinemas and theatres (the Odeon; the Playhouse)

9 most museums and art galleries (the British Museum; the Frick)

We usually use no article with:

•    continents, countries, states, counties, departments etc (Africa,
Brazil, Texas, Berkshire, Westphalia)

9 towns (Oxford)

9 streets (New Street* Willow Road)

9 lakes (Lake Michigan)

Exceptions: places whose name is (or contains) a common noun like
republic, state, union (e.g. the People's Republic of China, the United
Kingdom, the United States).

Note also the Netherlands* and its seat of government The Hague.

The is unusual in the titles of the principal public buildings and
organisations of a town, when the tide begins with the town name.

Oxford University (not the Oxford University)

Hull Station (not the-Huil Station)

Salisbury Cathedral Manchester City Council Birmingham Airport
Cheltenham Football Club With the names of less important institutions,
usage varies.

(The) East Oxford Community Centre. (The) Newbury School of English.
Names of single mountains vary. Most have no article.

Everest Kilimanjaro Snowdon Table Mountain But definite articles are
usually translated in the English versions of European mountain names,
except those beginning Le Mont.    ►

The Meije (= La Meije) The Matterhorn (= Das Matterhorn) but Mont Blanc
(not the Mont Blanc)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark18>>newspapers and magazines

The names of newspapers usually have the.

The Times The Washington Post The names of magazines do not always have
the.

New Scientist

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark19>>abbreviated styles

We usually leave out articles in abbreviated styles (see 1).

newspaper headlines headings picture captions notices, posters etc
instructions numbering and labelling

dictionary entries

lists

notes

MAN KILLED ON MOUNTAIN Introduction Chapter 2 Section B Mother and child
SUPER CINEMA, RITZ HOTEL Open packet at other end.

Go through door A.

Control to Car 27: can you hear me?

Turn to page 26. (not ... the page 26.) palm inner surface of hand...
take car to garage; pay phone bill;...

/ thinks company needs new office

For articles with abbreviations {NATO, the USA), see 2.2-3.

For the in double comparatives (the more, the better), see 139.5.

For a with few and little, see 329.

For a with hundred, thousand etc, see 389.11.

For the blind etc, see 17.1.

For the Japanese etc, see 17.2.

For next and the next> see 375; for last and the last, see 314.

For the instead of enough, see 187.8.

For another two days, a good three weeks etc, see 532.6.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark20>>as and though: special word order

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark21>>adjective/adverb/noun + as + clause

As and though can be used in a special structure after an adjective,
adverb noun. In this case they both mean ‘although', and suggest an
emphatic contrast. (In AmE only as is normally used like this; though is
unusual.) Cold as/though it was,, we went out (= Although it was very
cold,.. .) Bravely as/though they fought, they had no chance of winning.

Much as/though I respect your point of view, I can't agree.

Strange though it may seem, I don't like watching cricket.

Scot though she was, she supported the English team.

Occasionally as can be used in this structure to mean ‘because'.

Tired as she was, I decided not to disturb her.

In American English, as ... as is common.

As cold as it was, we went out.

For the word order in structures like I did as good a job as I could,
see 14.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark22>>72    as_{(} because, since and for

All four of these words can be used to refer to the reason for
something. (For as, since and for referring to time, see 73,208 and
522.) They are not used in the same way.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark23>>1    as and since

As and since are used when the reason is already known to the
listener/reader, or when it is not the most important part of the
sentence. As- and since-clauses often come at the beginning of
sentences.

As it*s raining again, we'll have to stay at home.

Since he had not paid his bill, his electricity was cut off,

As- and since-clauses are relatively formal; in an informal style, the
same ideas are often expressed with so.

Its raining again, so we'll have to stay at home.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark24>>2    because

Because puts more emphasis on the reason, and most often introduces new
information which is not known to the listener/reader.

Because I was ill for six months, I lost my job.

When the reason is the most important part of the sentence, the
because-clause usually comes at the end. It can also stand alone. Since
and as cannot be used like this.

Why am I leaving? I'm leaving because I'm Jed up!

(not ... I'm leaving as/since I'm fed up!)

Why are you laughing?Because you look so funny.

A because-clause can be used to say how one knows something.

You didn't tell me the truth, because I found the money in your room.

(= ... I know because I found ...)

For more information about became, see 94.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark25>>3    for

For introduces new information, but suggests that the reason is given as
an afterthought. A for-clause could almost be in brackets. For-clauses
never come at the beginning of sentences, and cannot stand alone. For,
used in this sense, is most common in a formal written style.

I decided to stop and have lunch - for I was feeling hungry.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark26>>73    as, when and while: simultaneous events

To talk about actions or situations that take place at the same time, we
can use as, when or while. There are some differences.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark27>>1 'backgrounds': as, when or while

We can use all three words to introduce a longer 'background* action or
situation, which is/was going on when something else happens/happened.

As I was walking down the street I saw Joe driving a Porsche.

The telephone always rings when you are having a bath.

While they were playing cards, somebody broke into the house.    ►

As-, when- and while-clauses can go at the beginning or end of
sentences, but as-clauses usually introduce less important information,
and most often go at the beginning.

A progressive tense is usually used for the longer ‘background* action
or situation {was walking are having, were playing). But as and while
can be used with a simple tense, especially with a ‘state' verb like
sit, lie, or grow.

As I sat reading the paper, the door burst open.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    simultaneous long actions: while", as

We usually use while to say that two longer actions or situations go
/went on at the same time. We can use progressive or simple tenses.

While you were reading the paper, I was working.

John cooked supper while I watched TV.

As is used (with simple tenses) to talk about two situations which
develop or change together.

As I get older I get more optimistic.

We prefer when to refer to ages and periods of life.

When I was a child we lived in London, (not As/While -I was a child...)
His parents died when he was twelve, (not ... while he was twelve.)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark29>>3    simultaneous short actions: (just) as;
(just) when

We usually use (just) as to say that two short actions or events happen/
happened at the same time.

As I opened my eyes I heard a strange voice.

Mary always arrives just as I start work.

(Just) when is also possible.

I thought of it just when you opened your mouth.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark30>>4    reduced clauses with when and while

It is often possible to leave out subject + be after when (especially
when it means ‘whenever'), and after while. This is rather formal.

Don't forget to signal when turning right.

{= ... when you are turning right.)

Climb when ready.

(= ... when you are ready.)

While in Germany, he got to know a family of musicians.

(= While he was ...)

Note that as is usually pronounced /dz/ (see 616).

For other uses of as, when and while, see the Index.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark31>>74 as if and as though; like

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark32>>1 meaning

As if and as though are both used to say what a situation seems like.
They can refer to something that we think may be true.

It looks as iflthough it's going to rain.

It sounds as iflthough John's going to change his job.

They can also be used to talk about things which we know are not true.

I feel as iflthough Vm dying.

She was acting as iflthough she was in charge.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark33>>2    tenses

When we talk about things which we know are not true, we can use a past
tense with a present meaning after as iflthough. This emphasises the
meaning of unreality. Compare:

-    She looks as if she is rich. (Perhaps she is.)

He talks as if he was rich. (But he is definitely not.)

-    You look as though you know each other.

Why is he looking at me as though he knew me? I've never seen him
before. In a formal style, were can be used instead of was in an
'unreal' comparison. This is common in American English.

He talks as if he were rich.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark34>>3    like meaning 'as if/though'

Like is often used in the same way as as if/though, especially in an
informal style. This used to be typically AmE, but it is now common in
BrE.

It seems like it's going to rain.

He sat there smiling like it was his birthday.

For the difference between like and as, see 326.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark35>>75    as long as

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    tenses

After as long as, we use a present tense to express a future idea.

VII remember that day as long as I live. (not .. .-as-leng-as I will
live.)

For other conjunctions which are used in this way, see 580.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    conditions

As/so long as is often used to state conditions.

You can take my car as/so long as you drive carefully.

(= ... on condition that you drive carefully.)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark38>>3    emphatic use

Before a number, as long as can be used to suggest great length.

These meetings can last as long as four hours.

For a similar use of as much/many as, see 136.6

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark39>>76    as such

Not... as such is used to say that something is not exactly what has
been suggested.

So you went to Japan on holiday? ~ Well, not a holiday as such -1 went
on business. But I managed quite a lot of sightseeing.

Tm not a teacher as such, but Yve taught English to some of my friends.
►

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark40>>77    as usual

Note that in this expression we use the adjective usual, not the adverb
usually. The train's late, as usual (not ... as usually.)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark41>>78    as well as

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark42>>1    meaning

As well as has a similar meaning to 'not only ... but also'.

She's got a goat> as well as five cats and three dogs.

He's clever as well as nice. (= He's not only nice, but also clever.)

She works in television as well as writing children's books.

When some information is already known to the listener/reader, we put
this with as well as.

As well as birds, some mammals can fly. (not Birds can fly, as well as
some mammals.)

They speak French in parts of Italy as well as France. (not They-speak
French-in France as-well-as parts of Italy.)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark43>>2    verbs after as well as

When we put a verb after as well as, we most often use the -ing form.

Smoking is dangerous, as well as making you smell bad. (not ... as well
as it makes you smell bad.)

As well as breaking his leg, he hurt his arm. (not ... os- weH tts-he
broke-his legr...)

After an infinitive in the main clause, an infinitive without to is
possible.

I have to feed the animals as well as look after the children.

Note the difference between:

She sings as well as playing the piano.

(= She not only plays, but also sings.)

She sings as well as she plays the piano.

(= Her singing is as good as her playing.)

For as urell, also and too, see 46-47.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark44>>79    ask

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark45>>1 ask and ask for

Ask for. ask somebody to give something Ask without for. ask somebody to
tell something.

Compare:

-    Don't ask me for money: (not Don't ask me-money.)

Don't ask me my name.

(More common xhanDon't ask me for my name.)

-    Ask for the menu.

Ask the price.

Ask is sometimes used without for when talking about asking for sums of
money, especially in connection with buying, selling and renting.

They're asking £500 a month rent

How much i$ the car? \^ I'm asking fifteen hundred.

Note also the expressions ask a lot of somebody, ask too much of
somebody* ask a favour of somebody and ask (for) permission.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark46>>2 infinitive structures

We can use infinitive structures after ask (see 282-283).

ask + infinitive I asked to go home.{= I asked permission to go home.)

ask + object + infinitive I asked John to go home. (= I told John I
would like him to go home.)

ask + for + object + infinitive I asked for the children to have extra
milk.

I asked for the parcel to be sent to my home address.

Note the difference between these two sentences:

I asked John to go home. (I wanted John to go home.)

I asked John if I could go home. (I wanted to go home myself.)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark47>>80 at/in and to

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark48>>1    the difference

At and in are generally used for position (for the difference, see 81);
to is used for movement or direction. Compare:

-    He works at the market    - My father lives in Canada.

He gets to the market by bike. I go to Canada to see him whenever I can.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark49>>2    expressions of purpose

If we mention the purpose of a movement before we mention the
destination, we usually use at I in before the place. Compare:

-    Let's go to Marcels for coffee.

Lets go and have coffee at Marcels, (not Let's go and have coffee to
Marcel's.)

-    I went to Canada to see my father.

I went to see my father in Canada, (not I went-to see my father io
Canada.)

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark50>>3    targets

After some verbs, at is used with the ‘target* of a perception or
non-verbal communication. Common examples are look, smile, wave, frown.

Why are you looking at her like that?

Because she smiled at me.

At is also used after some verbs referring to attacks or aggressive
behaviour. Common examples are shoot, laugh, throw, shout and point.

It's a strange feeling to have somebody shoot at you.

If you can't laugh at yourself who can you laugh at?

Stop throwing stones at the cat, darling.

You don't need to shout at me.

In my dream, everybody was pointing at me and laughing.    ►

Throw to, shout to and point to are used when there is no idea of
attack. Please do not throw food to the animals.

Could you shout to Phil and tell him it's breakfast time?

^{1}The train's late again/ she said, pointing to the timetable.

Arrive is generally followed by at or in; never by to.

We should arrive at Pat's in time for lunch, (not ... arrive to
Pat's--...) When did you arrive in New Zealand? (not ... to New
Zealand?)

For in and into, see 269.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark51>>81 at, on and in: place

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark52>>1    at

At is used to talk about position at a point.

It's very hot at the centre of the earth.

Turn right at the next corner.

Sometimes we use at with a larger place, if we just think of this as a
point: a stage on a journey or a meeting place, for example. Compare:

-    The plane stops for an hour at Frankfurt, (a point on a journey)

She lives in Frankfurt, (somebody's home)

-    Let's meet at the club, (a meeting point)

It was warm and comfortable in the club. (a place to spend time)

We very often use at before the name of a building, when we are thinking
not of the building itself but of the activity that happens there.

There's a good film at the cinema in Market Street.

Eat at the Steak House - best food in town.

Sorry I didn't phone last night -1 was at the theatre.

At is particularly common with proper names used for buildings or
organisations. Compare:

-    I first met your father at/in Harrods.

I first met your father in a shop.

-    She works at Legal and General Insurance.

She works in a big insurance company.

At is used to say where people study.

He's at the London School of Economics.

We use at with the name of a city to talk about the city's university.
Compare: He's a student at Oxford. He lives in Cambridge.

At is also used before the names of group activities. at a party at a
meeting at a concert at a lecture at the match

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark53>>2    on

On is used to talk about position on a line (for example a road or a
river). His house is on the way from Aberdeen to Dundee.

Stratford is on the river Avon.

But in is used for the position of things which form part of the line.

There's a misprint in line 6 on page 22.

Who's the good-looking boy in the sixth row?

On is used for position on a surface.

Hurry up - supper's on the table!

That picture would look better on the other wall There's a big spider on
the ceiling On can mean 'attached to\

Why do you wear that ring on your first finger?

There aren't many apples on the tree this year On is also used for
position by a lake or sea.

Bowness is on Lake Windermere.

Southend-on-Sea

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark54>>3    in

In is used for position inside large areas, and in three-dimensional
space (when something is surrounded on all sides).

I don't think he's in his office.    Let's go for a walk in the woods.

She grew up in Swaziland.    I last saw her in the car park.

He lived in the desert for three years.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark55>>4    public transport

We use on (and off) to talk about travel using public transport (buses,
trains, planes and boats), as well as (motor)cycles and horses.

There's no room on the bus; let's get off again.

He's arriving on the 3.15 train, (not .. .-in/with the 3.15 train.)

We're booked on flight 604.

It took five days to cross the Atlantic on the Queen Elizabeth.

I'll go down to the shop on my bike.

But we use in and out (of) to talk about cars and small private planes
and boats.

She came in a taxi.

He fell into the river when he was getting out of his canoe.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark56>>5    arrive

We generally use at (not to) after arrive; in is used before very large
places. He arrives at the airport at 15.30. (not He arrives to the
airport...)

What time do we arrive in New York?

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark57>>6    addresses

We generally use at to talk about addresses.

Are you still at the same address?

She lives at 73 Albert Street We use in (AmE on) if we just give the
name of the street.

She lives in Albert Street We use on for the number of the floor.

She lives in a flat on the third floor.

At can be used with a possessive to mean 'at somebody's house or shop*.
Where's Jane? She's round at Pat's.

You're always at the hairdresser's.    »

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark58>>7 special expressions

Note these expressions:

in/at church at home/work in/at school/college in a picture

in the sky in the rain in a tent in a hat

The map is on page 32. (BUT I opened the book at page 32,)

in bed / (the) hospital / prison on a farm working on the railway

Note that at is usually pronounced /at/, not /aet/ (see 616).

For the difference between at I in and to, see 80.

For smile at, shoot at etc, see 80.3.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark59>>82 at, on and in: time

at + clock time    at + weekend, public holiday

in + part of day    in + longer period

on + particular day

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark60>>1    dock times: at

I usually get up at six o'clock,

YU meet you at 4.15.    Phone me at lunch time.

At is usually left out before what time in an informal style (see
paragraph 7). What time does your train leave?

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark61>>2    parts of the day: in

I work best in the morning, three o'clock in the afternoon We usually go
out in the evening.

Note the difference between in the night (mostly used to mean ‘during
one particular night') and at night (= during any night). Compare:

I had to get up in the night I often work at night In an informal style,
we sometimes use plurals (days etc) with no preposition.

Would you rather work days or nights?

We use on if we say which morning/afternoon etc we are talking about, or
if we describe the morning/ afternoon etc.

See you on Monday morning.

We met on a cold afternoon in early spring,

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark62>>3    days: on

YU ring you on Tuesday. My birthday's on March 21st.

They're having a party on Christmas Day.

In an informal style we sometimes leave out on.

Ym seeing her Sunday morning.

We use plurals 0Sundays, Mondays etc) to talk about repeated actions.

We usually go and see Granny on Sundays.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark63>>4    public holidays and weekends: at

We use at to talk about the whole of the holidays at Christmas, New
Year, Easter and Thanksgiving (AmE).

We're having the roof repaired at Easter.

But we use on to talk about one day of the holiday.

Come and see us on Christmas Day.

What are you doing on Easter Monday?

British people say at the weekend; Americans use on.

What did you do at the weekend?

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark64>>5    longer periods: in

It happened in the week after Christmas I was bom in March.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Kent is beautiful in spring. He died in 1616.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Our house was built in the 15th century.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark65>>6    other uses of in

In can also be used to say how soon something will happen, and to say
how long something takes to happen.

Ask me again in three or four days.

I can run 200 metres in about 30 seconds.

The expression in .. .'s time is used to say how soon something will
happen, not how long something takes. Compare:

I'll see you again in a month's time. It'll be ready in three weeks'
time. He wrote the book in a month, (not ... in a month's time.)

In American English, in can be used in negative sentences, like for, to
talk about periods up to the present.

I haven't seen her in years.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark66>>7    expressions with no preposition

At!on! in are not normally used in expressions of time before next,
last, this, that (sometimes), one, any (in an informal style), each,
every, some, all See you next week.    Come any time.

Are you free this morning? I didn't feel very well that week.

I'm at home every evening. Let's meet one day.

We stayed all day.

These prepositions are not normally used, either, before yesterday, the
day before yesterday, tomorrow or the day after tomorrow.

What are you doing the day after tomorrow?

And prepositions are usually dropped in questions beginning What/Which +
expression of time, and in answers which only contain an expression of
time. What day is the meeting?

Which week did you say you're on holiday?

What time are you leaving? ~ Eight o'clock.

Note that at is usually pronounced /at/, not /aet/ (see 616).

For the difference between in and during, see 168.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark67>>83    at all

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark68>>1    at all with a negative

We often use at all to emphasise a negative idea.

I didn't understand anything at all. (= I didn't understand even a
little.) She was hardly frightened at all

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark69>>2    questions etc

At all can also be used in questions, and with ‘non-affirmative' words
like if, ever and any.

Do you play poker at all? (= ... even a little?)

He ll come before supper if he comes at all You can come whenever you
like - any time at all

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark70>>3    Not at all

The expression Not at all is used (especially in British English) as a
rather formal answer to Thank you (see 545.19) and to Do you mind if...?
(see 351).

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark71>>84    at first and first

We use at first to talk about the beginning of a situation, to make a
contrast with something different that happens/happened later. At
first... is often followed by but.

At first they were very happy, but then things started going wrong.

The work was hard at first, but I got used to it In other cases, we
usually prefer first.

That's mine -1 saw it first^{1} (not ... / saw it at first:)

We lived there when we were first married. (= ... in the early days of
our marriage.) (not ... when we were at first-married.)

First, I want to talk about the history of the problem; then I'll
outline the situation today; and then we'll discuss possible solutions,
(not At first, I want to talk...)

Note that at last is not the opposite of at first - see 204.

For first(ly) as a discourse marker, see also 157.10.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark72>>85    auxiliary verbs

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark73>>1 the need for auxiliary verbs

In English sentences, a lot of important meanings are expressed by the
verb phrase - for example questioning, negation, time, completion,
continuation, repetition, willingness, possibility, obligation. But
English verbs do not have many different forms: the maximum (except for
be) is five (e.g. see, sees, seeing, saw, seen). So to express all these
meanings, 'auxiliary' (or ‘helping') verbs are added to other verbs.
There are two groups.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark74>>2    be, do and have

Be is added to other verbs to make progressive and passive forms.

Is it raining? She was imprisoned for three years.

Do is used to make questions, negatives and emphatic forms of
non-auxiliary verbs.

Do you smoke? It didn't matter: Do come in.

Have is used to make perfect forms.

What have you done?    I realised that I hadn't turned the lights off.

See the Index for details of entries on these forms and their uses, and
on non-auxiliary uses of he, do and have.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark75>>3    modal auxiliary verbs

The verbs will, shall, would, should, can_{t} could, may, might, must
and ought are usually called ‘modal auxiliary verbs*. They are used with
other verbs to add various meanings, mostly to do with certainty or
obligation.

She may be on holiday

You must write to Uncle Arthur.

For details, see 353-354 and the entries for each verb.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark76>>4    other verb + verb structures

Other verbs (e.g. seem) which are used in verb + verb structures are not
usually called ‘auxiliary verbs*. One important difference is
grammatical. In auxiliary verb structures, questions and negatives are
made without do; in other verb + verb structures the auxiliary do has to
be added to the first verb. Compare:

-    She ought to understand.    - He is swimming.

Ought she to understand?    He is not swimming

-    She seems to understand.    - He likes swimming.

Does she seem to understand? He doesn't like swimming.

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark77>>86 (a)wake and (a)waken

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark78>>1 use

Wake is the most common of these four verbs. It can mean ‘stop sleeping*
or ‘make (somebody else) stop sleeping*. It is often followed by up,
especially when it means ‘stop sleeping*.

I woke up three times in the night.

Wake up! It's time to go to work, (not Wake!...)

Could you wake me (up) at half past six?

Waken is a more literary alternative to wake (up).

The princess did not waken for a hundred years.

Then the prince wakened her with a kiss.

Awake and awaken are also rather literary words. They can be used to
mean ‘wake (up)', but are more often used figuratively, to talk not
about waking from sleep, but about the waking of emotions, understanding
etc.

I slowly awoke to the danger that threatened me.

At first I paid little attention, but slowly my interest awoke.

The smell of her perfume awakened the gipsy's desire.    ►

<<main-6.xhtml#bookmark79>>2 awake and asleep (adjectives)

In informal British English the adjectives awake and asleep are more
common in predicative position (after be) than the verb forms waking and
sleeping.

Is the baby awake yet?    You were asleep at ten o'clock.

<<main-7.xhtml>>

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark0>>87 back and again

Back and again can be used with similar meanings, but there are some
differences.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark1>>1    back with a verb

With a verb, we use back to suggest a return to an earlier situation, a
movement in the opposite direction to an earlier movement, and similar
ideas. Again is not normally used in this way with a verb.

Give me my watch back, (not Give-me-my watch again.)

Vm taking this meat back to the shop, (not Ym taking this meat to the
shop again.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    again with a verb

With a verb, again usually suggests repetition. Compare:

-    That was lovely. Can you play it again?

When I've recorded your voice I'll play it back.

-    Eric was really bad-mannered. I'm never going to invite him again.

She comes to our parties but she never invites us back.

-    I don't think he got your letter. You'd better write again.

If I write to you, will you write back?

Note the difference between sell back (to the same person) and sell
again. The bike you sold me is too small Can I sell it back to you?

If we buy this house and then have to move somewhere else, how easy will
it be to sell it again?

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    cases when back is not used

When the verb itself already expresses the idea of ‘return to an earlier
situation' or ‘movement in the opposite direction', back is not
generally used. Stefan can never return to his country. (More natural
than Stefan can never return back...)

Who opened the window? Could you close it, please? (not ..
.close-it-back...)

However, again can be used to emphasise the idea of ‘return'.

Stefan can never return to his country again.

Who opened the window? Could you close it again, please?

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark4>>4    adverb particles etc

With adverb particles and prepositional phrases, we can use both back
and again to suggest ‘return to an earlier situation' etc.

I stood up, and then I sat (back) down (again).

He tasted the apple and spat it (back) out (again).

Go (back) to sleep (again).

YU be (back) in the office (again) on Monday.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark5>>5    ring/call back

Note that ring back (BrE only) and call back can be used to mean both
'return a phone call' and ‘repeat a phone call'.

She's not here just now, *Ask her to ring me back. (= return my call)

I haven't got time to talk now. ~ OK, I'll ring back later. (= ring
again)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark6>>6    word order

Back is an adverb particle (see 20), and can usually go between a verb
and its object, unless this is a pronoun (see 599.4). Again cannot.

Take back your money -1 don't want it. (or Take your money back...)
Count the money again, please. (not Count again themoney-...)

For other uses of back and again, see a good dictionary.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark7>>88    bath and bathe

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark8>>1    bath

Pronunciation: bath /baiG/ bathing /'ba:0m/ bathed /ba:0t/

This verb is not used in American English.

It can have an object.

It's your turn to bath the baby.

And it can be used to mean ‘bath oneself.

I don't think he baths very often.

This use is rather formal; people more often say have! take a bath.

Tm feeling hot and sticky; I think I'll have a bath.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark9>>2    bathe

Pronunciation: bathe /beiG/ bathing /'beiOirj/ bathed /beiOd/

Bathe is the American equivalent of bath. (Take a bath is also common.)

It's your turn to bathe the baby. (AmE)

I always bathe before I go to bed. (AmE) (or ... take a bath)

Bathe can also be used (in both British and American English) to talk
about putting water on a part of the body that hurts (for instance sore
eyes).

Your eyes are very red - you ought to bathe them.

And bathe can be used (in British English only) to mean 'swim for
pleasure^{1}.

NO BA THING FROM THIS BEACH This use is rather formal; people more often
say have a swim, go for a swim, go swimming or just swim.

Lets go for a swim in the river.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark10>>89    be: progressive forms

I am being / you are being etc + adjective/noun

We can use this structure to talk about actions and behaviour, but not
usually to talk about feelings. Compare:

- You're being stupid (= You're doing stupid things.)

I was being very careful (= I was doing something carefully.)    ►

Who's being a silly baby, then?

- Vm happy just now. (not I'm being happy just now.)

I was depressed when you phoned, (not / was being depressed...)

Note the difference between He's being sick (BrE = He's vomiting -
bringing food up from the stomach) and He's sick (= He's ill).

For the use of am being etc in passive verb forms, see 412.2.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark11>>90    be with auxiliary do

Normally, be is used without the auxiliary do.

I'm not often sick, (not I -donrt-oftenrbe-sick.)

But do is used to make negative imperative sentences with be (when we
tell somebody not to do something).

Don't be silly!    Don't be such a nuisance!

And do be can begin emphatic imperatives.

Do be careful!    Do be quiet, for God's sake!

In an informal style, people sometimes use do with be in one or two
other structures which have a similar meaning to imperative sentences.

Why don't you be a good boy and sit down?

If you don^{}}t be quiet you'll go straight to bed.

For other auxiliary uses of do, see 159.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark12>>91    be + infinitive: I am to you are to ...
etc

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark13>>1    plans and arrangements: He is to visit
Nigeria

We use this structure in a formal style to talk about official and other
plans and arrangements.

The President is to visit Nigeria next month.

We are to get a 10 per cent wage rise in June.

I felt nervous because I was soon to leave home for the first time.

A perfect infinitive can be used to show that a planned event did not
happen. I was to have started work last week, but I changed my mind.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark14>>2    'fate': We were to meet again

Another use is to talk about things which are/were ‘hidden in the
future', fated to happen.

I thought we were saying goodbye for ever. But we were to meet again,
many years later, under very strange circumstances.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark15>>3    pre-conditions: If we are to get there
in time...

The structure is common in //-clauses, when the main clause expresses a
pre-condition - something that must happen first if something else is to
happen.

If we are to get there by lunchtime we had better hurry.

He knew he would have to work hard if he was to pass his exam.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark16>>4    orders: You are to do your homework

The structure is used to give orders, often by parents speaking to
children. You are to do your homework before you watch TV.

She can go to the party, but she's not to be back late.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark17>>5    be + passive infinitive: It is not to be
removed

Be + passive infinitive is often used in notices and instructions.
amfarelis (not) to be + past participle

This cover is not to be removed.

Sometimes only the passive infinitive is used.

To be taken three times a day after meals, (on a medicine bottle)

Some other common expressions with be + passive infinitive:

There's nothing to be done.    She was nowhere to be found.

I looked out of the window, but there was nothing to be seen.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark18>>6    tenses

Note that this structure exists only in present and past tenses. We
cannot say that somebody has-been to go somewhere, or u/ill/must be to
go somewhere. Participle structures (being-to-go) are not possible
either.

For other ways of talking about the future, see 211-221.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark19>>92 be and have

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark20>>1    physical conditions: hunger, thirst etc

To talk about experiencing hunger, thirst, heat, cold and certain other
common physical conditions, we normally use be (or feet) + adjective,
not have + noun. Note the following expressions:

be hungry (not have hunger) be thirsty be warm be hot be cold be sleepy
be afraid Note also:

be right be wrong be lucky

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark21>>2    age, height, weight, size and colour

Be is also used to talk about age, height, length, weight, size, shape
and colour. I'm nearly thirty. (not J-have-nearty-thirty.)

She is nearly my age.    He is six feet tall.

I wish I was ten kilos lighter.    What size are your shoes?

The room is ten metres long.    What colour are his eyes?

She is the same height as her father.

Be heavy is not usually used in measuring expressions.

It weighs 37 kilos. (not tirS-37-kilos-heavy.)

For have in expressions like have a bath, have a drink, have a walk, see
236.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark22>>93    beat and win

You can win (in) a game, a race, a battle, an argument etc, and you can
win a prize, money etc. You can beat a person that you are
playing/arguing/fighting etc against. Compare:

My girlfriend usually wins when we play poker.

My girlfriend beat me at poker the first time we played (not My
girlfriend won me at poker-...)

Both verbs are irregular:

beat - beat - beaten    win - won - won

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark23>>94    because

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark24>>1    because and because of

Because is a conjunction. It is used at the beginning of a clause,
before a subject and verb. Because of\s a two-word preposition, used
before a noun or a pronoun. Compare:

-    We were late because it rained, (not .. beeause-of it-ratned:)

We were late because of the rain. (not ... because the rain:)

-    Vm happy because I met you.

Tm happy because of you.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    position of because-clauses

Because and its clause can go after or before the main clause.

I finished early because I worked fast.

Because I worked fast, I finished early:

Because-clauses can sometimes stand alone, especially as answers or
after hesitations.

Why are you crying? ~ Because John and I have had a row.

I don't think I'll go to the party... Because I'm feeling a bit tired.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark26>>3    just because ... (it) doesn't mean ...

This is quite a common structure in informal speech.

Just because you're older than me (it) doesn't mean you can do what you
like.

Just because I'm your brother (it) doesn't mean you can keep asking me
for money.

For because after reason, see 492.

For the differences between because, as, since and for, see 72.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark27>>95    been meaning 'come' or 'gone'

Been is often used as a past participle of come and go.

Granny has been to see us twice since Christmas.

I haven't been to the theatre for ages.

Have you ever been to Northern Ireland?

Note that been is only used for completed visits. Compare:

-    The postman's already been. (He has come and gone away again.)

Jane's come, so we can start work. (She has come and is still here.)

-    I've been to London three times this week.

Where's Lucy?She's gone to London.

For be gone, see 229.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark28>>96    before: adverb

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark29>>1    'at any time before now/then'

We can use before to mean ‘at any time before now*. In British English,
a present perfect tense is normally used.

I think I've seen this film before. Have you ever been here before?
Before can also mean ‘at any time before then - before the past moment
that we are talking about'. In this case a past perfect tense is used.

She realised that she had seen him before.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark30>>2    counting back from a past time: eight
years before

We also use before after a time expression to ‘count back' from a past
moment

-    to say how much earlier something else had happened. A past perfect
tense is normally used.

When I went back to the town that I had left eight years before,
everything was different, (not ... that I had left before
eight-years-...)

To count back from the present, we use ago_{t} not before (see also 33).

I left school four years ago. (not ... four years before i before four
years)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark31>>3    before, before that and first

Before is not generally used alone to mean ‘first* or ‘before that
happens*. Instead we use first or before that.

I want to get married one day. But before that / first, I want to travel
(not ... But before, I want to travel)

For the difference between before and ever, see 191.

For before as a conjunction and preposition, see 97-98.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark32>>97    before: conjunction

before + clause, + clause clause + before + clause

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark33>>1 position of before-clause

Before can join one clause to another. Compare:

Before I have breakfast, I spend half an hour doing physical exercises.

I prefer to do my exercises before I have breakfast (In both sentences,
the speaker does exercises first and then has breakfast. In the second
example, the before- clause is given more importance because it comes at
the end. Note the comma in the first example.)

Before he did military service, he went to university.

(He went to university first.)    ►

He did military service before he went to university.

(He did military service first.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark34>>2    present tense with future meaning

With before, we use a present tense if the meaning is future (see 580).

I'll telephone you before I come, (not ... before I will come.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark35>>3    perfect tenses

In clauses with before, we often use present perfect and past perfect
tenses to emphasise the idea of completion.

You can't go home before I've signed the letters. (= ... before the
moment when I have completed the letters.)

He went out before I had finished my sentence. (= ... before the moment
when I had completed my sentence.)

(Note that in sentences like the last, a past perfect tense can refer to
a time later than the action of the main verb. This is unusual.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark36>>4    before things that don't happen

We sometimes use before to talk about things that don't happen (because
something stops them).

We'd better get out of here before your father catches us.

She left before I could ask for her phone number.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark37>>5    before .. .ing

In a formal style, we often use the structure before .. .ing.

Please put out all lights before leaving the office.

Before beginning the book, she spent five years on research.

For before as an adverb and preposition, see 96, 98.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark38>>98 before (preposition) and in front of

before: time in front of place

Compare:

I must move my car before nine o'clock

It's parked in front of the post office, (not ... before-the
post-office:)

Before is normally used to refer to time. However, it can refer to
place: a to talk about order in queues, lists, documents etc Do you
mind? I was before / in front of you!

Her name comes before mine in the alphabet.

We use ‘a' before a consonant and ‘the' before a vowel

b to mean ‘in the presence of (somebody important)'

I came up before the magistrates for dangerous driving last week.

c in the expressions right before one's eyes, before one's very eyes.

For the difference between in front of and facing! opposite, see 402.

For before as an adverb and conjunction, see 96-97.

For by meaning ‘at/on or before*, see 117.

below, under, underneath, beneath 100

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark39>>99 begin and start

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark40>>1    meaning; formality

Begin and start can both be used with the same meaning.

I began/started teaching when I was 24.

If Sheila doesn't come soon_{f} let's begin/start without her We
generally prefer begin when we are using a more formal style. Compare:
We will begin the meeting with a message from the President.

Damn! It's starting to rain.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark41>>2    cases where begin is not possible

Start (but not begin) is used to mean:

a ‘start a journey'

I think we ought to start at six; while the roads are empty.

b ‘start working' (for machines)

The car won't start.

c ‘make something start'

How do you start the washing machine?

The Presidents wife fired the gun to start the race.

For infinitives and -ing forms after begin and start, see 299.10.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark42>>100 below, under, underneath, beneath

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark43>>1    lower than': below or under

The prepositions below and under can both mean ‘lower than'.

Look in the cupboard below/under the sink.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark44>>2    not directly under: below

We prefer below when one thing is not directiy under another.

The climbers stopped 300m below the top of the mountain.

A moment later the sun had disappeared below the horizon.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark45>>3    covered: under

We prefer under when something is covered or hidden by what is over it,
and when things are touching.

I think the cats under the bed.

What are you wearing under your sweater?

The whole village is under water (not ..beUnv-water.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark46>>4    measurements: below

Below is used in measurements of temperature and height, and in other
cases where we think of a vertical scale.

The temperature is three degrees below zero.

Parts of Holland are below sea level The plane came down below the
clouds.

She's well below average in intelligence.    ►

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark47>>5    less than': under

We usually use under, not below, to mean ‘less than* or ‘younger than'.

There were under twenty people at the lecture.

You can't see this film if you're under 18.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark48>>6    underneath

Underneath is sometimes used as a preposition instead of under, but only
for physical position. Compare:

There's a mouse under(neath) the piano.

He's still under 18. (not ... underneath 18:)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark49>>7    beneath

Beneath is used mostly in a rather literary style.

The ship sank slowly beneath the waves.

It is common before abstract nouns in some fixed expressions.

He acts as if I was beneath his notice. (= not worth considering)

Her behaviour is beneath contempt (= really disgraceful)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark50>>8    adverbs

Below can be used as an adverb.

We looked over the cliff at the waves crashing on the rocks below.

Under can be used as an adverb particle (see 20) with some verbs.

A lot of businesses are going under because of the economic crisis.

In other cases we prefer underneath for adverbial use.

I can't take my sweater off-I haven't got anything on underneath.

(not ... anything-on under.)

In a book or a paper, see below means ‘look at something written later'.

The difference between above and over is similar to the difference
between below and under. See 6 for details.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark51>>101 beside and besides

Beside is a preposition meaning ‘at the side of, ‘by', ‘next to'.

Who's the big guy sitting beside Jane?

Besides can be used like as well as (see 78), when we add new
information to what is already known.

Besides literature, we have to study history and philosophy.

Who was at the party besides Jack and the Bensons?

Besides can also be used as a discourse marker (see 157.11) meaning
‘also', ‘as well', ‘in any case'. It is often used to add a stronger,
more conclusive argument to what has gone before. In this case, besides
usually goes at the beginning of a clause.

I don't like those shoes; besides, they're too expensive.

It's too late to go out now. Besides, it's starting to rain.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark52>>102    besides, except and apart from

These expressions are sometimes confused.

Besides usually adds: it is like saying with, or plus (+).

Besides the violin, he plays the piano and the flute. (He plays three
instruments.)

Except subtracts: it is like saying without, or minus (-).

I like all musical instruments except the violin.

Apart from can be used in both senses.

Apart from the violin, he plays the piano and the flute. (= Besides the
violin ...)

I like all musical instruments apart from the violin. (= ... except the
violin.) After no, nobody, nothing and similar negative words, the three
expressions can all have the same meaning.

He has nothing besides / except / apart from his salary. (= He only has
his salary.)

For the use of besides as an adverbial discourse marker, see 157.11. For
beside, see 101.

For except and except for, see 194.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark53>>103    bet

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark54>>1    use

I bet (you) can be used in an informal style to mean ‘I think it's
probable that*. That is usually dropped.

/ bet (you) she's not at home.

(More natural than I bet (you) that she's not at home.)

I'll bet... is also possible. m bet you she's not at home.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    tenses

After I bet (you), we often use a present tense to refer to the future.

I bet (you) they don't come this evening (or I bet (you) they won't
come...) I bet (you) the Conservatives (will) lose.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark56>>3    two objects

When bet is used to talk about real bets, it can be followed by two
objects: the person with whom the bet is made, and the money or thing
that is bet.

I bet you £5 it doesn't rain this week.

My father bet my mother dinner at the Ritz that she would marry him. He
won, but she never bought him the dinner.

Bet is irregular [bet - bet - bet).

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark57>>104    better

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark58>>1 'recovered^{1}

When better means ‘recovered from an illness*, it can be used with
completely or quite (unlike other comparative adjectives).

Don't start work again until you're quite better    ►

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark59>>2 correcting mistakes

We do not normally use better to correct mistakes.

She's gone to Hungary - or rather, Poland, (not ... or better, Poland:)

For the structure had better, see 230.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark60>>105 between and among

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark61>>1    between two

We say that something is between two people, things, or groups of
things. She was standing between Alice and Mary, a long valley between
high mountains Between is often used to talk about distances or
intervals.

We need two metres between the windows.

HI be at the office between nine and eleven.

Between is common before each.

There seems to be less and less time between each birthday.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark62>>2    between or among more than two

We usually say that somebody or something is between several clearly
separate people or things. We prefer among when somebody or something is
in a group, a crowd or a mass of people or things which we do not see
separately. Compare:

-    Our house is between the woods, the river and the village.

His house is hidden among the trees.

-    I saw something between the wheels of the car.

Your letter is somewhere among all these papers.

Among is normal before a singular (uncountable) noun.

They found an envelope full of money among all the rubbish.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark63>>3    dividing and sharing; difference

We can talk about dividing or sharing things between or among more than
two people or groups.

He divided all his money betweenJamong his children and grandchildren.
We shared the work between/among the five of us.

We normally use between after difference.

There are enormous differences between languages.

What's the difference between ‘between' and ‘among7

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark64>>4    'one of etc

Among can mean ‘one of, ‘some of or ‘included in'.

Among the first to arrive was the ambassador.

He has a number of criminals among his friends

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark65>>106    big, large and great

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark66>>1    concrete nouns: usually big or large

With concrete nouns - the names of things you can see, touch etc - we
mostly use big and large. Big is most common in an informal style.

Get your big feet off my flowers.

She is a small woman, but she has very large feet.

It was a large house, situated near the river.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark67>>2    great with concrete nouns

Great is not normally used simply to talk about physical size. In an
informal style, it is often used with concrete nouns to mean
‘wonderful'.

I've just got a great new flat.

And it can also be used with meanings like 'large and impressive'.

Great clouds of smoke rose above the burning cathedral.

Another meaning is ‘famous' or 'important'.

Do you think Napoleon was really a great man?

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark68>>3    abstract nouns: usually great

Great is common with abstract nouns - the names of things you cannot
see, touch etc.

I have great respect for her ideas, (not big/large respect)

His behaviour caused great annoyance. (not bigfktrge annoyance)

You are making a great mistake.

Her work showed a great improvement last year.

Big can be used with countable abstract nouns in an informal style.

You're making a big mistake.

Big bargains for weekend shoppers!

Large is used with countable abstract nouns referring to quantities,
amounts and proportions.

We're thinking of giving your firm a very large order.

There was a large error in the accounts.

She spent large sums on entertaining:

He wrote a large part of the book while he was in hospitaL Big and large
are not generally used with uncountable nouns - but note the fixed
expressions big business, big trouble.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark69>>4    large and wide

Large is a ‘false friend* for speakers of some languages. It does not
mean ‘wide*.

The river is 100 metres wide, (not ... 100 metres large.)

For wide and broad. see 115.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark70>>107    [a] bit

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark71>>1 use

A bit is often used as an adverb with the same meaning as a little (see
329). She's a bit old to play with dolls, isn't she?    »

Can you drive a bit slower? Wait a bit Note that when a bit and a little
are used with non-comparative adjectives, the meaning is usually
negative or critical.

a bit tired a bit expensive a little (too) old (but not a bit kind. a
littte interesting)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark72>>2    a bit of a

A bit of a can be used before some nouns in an informal style. The
meaning is similar to rather a (see 490).

He's a bit of a fool if you ask me. I've got a bit.of a problem.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark73>>3    not a bit

The informal expression not a bit means ^{f}not at all'.

fm not a bit tired. Do you mind ifl put some music on? ~ Not a bit.

For a bit with comparative adjectives and adverbs, see 140.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark74>>108    born and borne

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark75>>1    be bom

To talk about coming into the world at birth, we use the passive
expression to be born.

Hundreds of children are bom deaf every year.

To give a place or date of birth, we use the simple past: wasiwere born.

I was bom in 1936. (not f-am born in 1936.)

My parents were bom in Scotland.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark76>>2    the verb bear

The verb bear {bore, borne) is used to talk about accepting or
tolerating difficult experiences. It is most common in the expression
can't bear (= hate, can't stand).

I can*t bear her voice.

In a very formal style, bear can be used with other meanings, including
‘give birth to' and ‘carry*.

She bore six children in seven years. (More normal: She had six
children...) The king's body was borne away to the cathedral

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark77>>109    borrow and lend

Borrowing is taking (for a time).

Can I borrow your bicycle? (not Can I lend your bicycle?)

You borrow something from somebody.

/ borrowed a pound from my brother, (not 1-borrowed my brother a pound)
Lending (AmE also loaning) is giving (for a time). You lend something to
somebody, or lend somebody something.

1 lent my coat to Steve, and 1 never saw it again.

Lend me your comb for a minute, will you? (not Borrow me your-...)

For lend in passive structures, see 415.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark78>>110 both

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark79>>1    meaning

Both means 'each of two'.

Both my parents were born in Scotland.

We do not normally use both when the meaning is not 'each'.

My two brothers carried the piano upstairs. (More natural than Both my
brothers carried the piano upstairs - they didn't each carry it
separately.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark80>>2    both and both of

Before a noun with a determiner (e.g. the, my, these), both and both of
axe both possible.

She's eaten both (of) the chops. Both (of) these oranges are bad He lost
both (of) his parents when he was a child.

We often drop the or a possessive after both; of is not used in this
case.

She's eaten both chops, (not .. . bothr of chops)

He lost both parents when he was a child.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark81>>3    the not used before both

Note that we do not put the before both, both (the) children (not
the-botk-children)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark82>>4    personal pronouns: both of

With personal pronouns, we use both o/+ us!you! them. Both of
us/you/them can be a subject or object.

Both of them can come tomorrow.

She's invited both of us. Mary sends both of you her love.

We can put both after pronouns used as objects.

She^{f}s invited us both.    Mary sends you both her love.

But this structure is not used in complements (after be) or in short
answers. Who broke the window - Sarah or Alice? ~ It was both of them.

(not ... them both:)

Who did she invite? ~ Both of us. (not Us-both.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark83>>5    both with a verb

When both refers to the subject of a clause, it can go with the verb, in
‘mid-position' (for details of word order, see 24).

We can both swim    Those oranges were both bad.

The children have both gone to bed. My sisters both work in education.
Note that these meanings can also be expressed by using both (of) with a
subject (see above).

Both of us can swim. Both (of) the children have gone to bed

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark84>>6    negative structures

Instead of both ... not, we normally use neither (see 372).

Neither of them is here, (not Both of them-are not-here.)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark85>>111 both ... and

We often balance this structure, so that the same kind of words or
expressions follow both and and.

She's both pretty and clever. (adjectives)

I spoke to both the Director and her secretary. (nouns)

She both dances and sings. (verbs)

However, unbalanced sentences with both ... and are common. Some people
prefer to avoid them.

She both dances and she sings. (both + verb; and + clause)

I both play the piano and the violin.

Both cannot begin a complete clause in this structure.

You can both borrow the flat and (you can) use our car. (but not Both
you can borrow the flat and you -can use the-car.)

See also either... or (175), neither... nor (373) and not only... but
also (383).

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark86>>112 bring and take

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark87>>1 speaker's/hearer's position

We use bring for movements to the place where the speaker or hearer is,
but we use take for movements to other places. Compare:

- This is a nice restaurant Thanks for bringing me here, (not ..
.-tkartks-for

Let's have another drink* and then Til take you home. (not ... and then
Pti bring you home.)

-    (on the phone) Can we come over on Sunday? We'll bring a picnic.

Let's go and see Aunt May on Sunday. We can take a picnic.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark88>>2    speaker's/hearer's past or future
position

We can also use bring for a movement to a place where the speaker or
hearer already was or will be. Compare:

-    Where's that report? ~ I brought it to you when you were in Mr
Allen's office.

Don't you remember?

I took the papers to John's office.

-    I'll arrive at the hotel at six o'clock. Can you bring the car at
six-thirty?

Can you take the car to the garage tomorrow? I won't have time, (not Gan

you bring the car to the garage tomorrow?...)

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark89>>3    joining a movement

Bring (with) can be used to talk about joining a movement of the
speaker's/ hearer's, even if take is used for the movement itself.

I'm taking the kids to the cinema tonight. Would you like to come with
us

and bring Susie?

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark90>>4 somebody else's position

Sometimes when we are talking about somebody else (not the speaker or
hearer), that person can become the centre of our attention. In that
case, we

use bring for movements to the place where he/she is (or was or will
be). This often happens in stories.

He heard nothing for months. Then one day his brother brought him a
letter:

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark91>>5 American English

Americans often use bring where British English has take.

Let's go and see Aunt May on Sunday. We can bring a picnic.

The difference between come and go is similar. See 134.

For other uses of take, see 576.

<<main-7.xhtml#bookmark92>>113    bring up and educate

Bring up and the noun upbringing are mosdy used for the moral and social
training that children receive at home. Educate and education are used
for the intellectual and cultural training that people get at school and
university. Lucy was brought up by her aunt and educated at the local
school.

Their kids are very badly brought up - always screaming and fighting.

(not T-heir kids are- very badly educated...)

Which is better: a good upbringing and a bad education, or the opposite?

<<main-8.xhtml>>

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark0>>114    Britain, the United Kingdom, the
British Isles and England

(Great) Britain is normally used to mean the island which includes
England, Scotland and Wales; British is used for the people of these
three countries. Great Britain and Northern Ireland together are called
the United Kingdom; some people also use Britain in this wider sense.

The British Isles is a geographical, not a political term. It is the
name for England, Scotland, Wales, the whole of Ireland (which includes
both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, also called ‘Eire'),
and the smaller islands round about.

Note that England is only one part of Britain. Scotland and Wales are
not in England, and Scottish and Welsh people do not like to be called
'English'.

A very informal word for a British person is Brit. Briton is used mainly
in news reports and newspaper headlines (e.g. three britons die in air
crash), and to refer to the ancient inhabitants of Britain.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark1>>115    broad and wide

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark2>>1 physical distance

To talk about the physical distance from one side of something to the
other, we more often use wide.

We live in a very wide street.    The car's too wide for the garage.

Broad can also be used in this physical sense, especially in more formal
descriptions.

Across the broad valley, the mountains rose blue and mysterious.

She wore a simple green dress with a broad black belt.    »

Note also: broad shoulders; a broad back, wide eyes; a wide mouth.

Wide is used in expressions of measurement: note the word order.

The river is about half a mile wide. (not ... wide halfa-miier)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark3>>2 abstract meanings

Both words can express more abstract meanings. Common expressions: broad
agreement (= agreement on most important points) broad-minded (=
tolerant)    broad daylight (= full, bright daylight)

a wide variety/range (of opinions etc)

For other common expressions with broad and wide, see a good dictionary.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark4>>116 but meaning 'except'

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark5>>1    use

We use but to mean ‘except* after all, none, every, any, no (and
everything, everybody, nothing, nobody, anywhere etc).

He eats nothing but hamburgers.    Everybody's here but George.

I've finished all the jobs but one.

Note the expressions next but one, last but two etc (mainly BrE).

Jackie lives next door but one. (= two houses from me)

I was last but two in the race yesterday.

But for expresses the idea ‘if something had not existed/happened*.

I would have been in real trouble but far your help.

But for the storm, I would have been home before eight.

Note also the structure whofwhat should... but (used to talk about
surprising appearances, meetings etc).

I walked out of the station, and who should I see but old Beryl?

I looked under the bed, and what should I find but the keys I lost last
week?

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark6>>2    pronouns after but

After but, we usually use object pronouns {me, him etc). Subject
pronouns (7, he etc) are possible in a more formal style before a verb.

Nobody but her would do a thing like that (More formal: Nobody but
she...)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark7>>3    verbs after but

The verb form after but usually depends on what came before. Infinitives
are normally without to.

She's not interested in anything but skiing, {interested in ... skiing)

That child does nothing but watch TV. {does... watch)

Cannot (help) but + infinitive without to is sometimes used with the
meaning of ‘can't help .. .ing' (see 126). Cannot but... is very formal;
cannot help but... is especially common in American English.

One cannot (help) but admire his courage. (= One has to admire ...)

7 can't help but wonder what's going to happen to us all Infinitives
with to are used after no alternative!choice/option but The train was
cancelled, so I had no alternative but to take a taxi.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark8>>4 but meaning 'only'

In older English, but was used to mean 'only', but this is now very
unusual. She is but a child.

Note: but is usually pronounced /bat/, not /bAt/ (see 616).

For except, see 194.

For but as a conjunction and ellipsis after but, see 178.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark9>>117    by: time

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark10>>1    not later than

By can mean ‘not later than'.

M be home by five o'clock. (= at or before five)

Can I borrow your car?--- Yes, but I must have it back by tonight (=
tonight or before)

By can also suggest the idea of ‘progress up to a particular time\

By the end of the meal, everybody was drunk.

Before a verb, we use by the time (that).

I'll be in bed by the time you get home.

By the time that the guards realised what was happening, the gang were
already inside the bank

For the difference between by and until, see 602.6.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    other meanings

By can also be used to talk about time in the rather literary
expressions by day and by night (= during the day/night).

He worked by night and slept by day.

Note also day by day, hour by hour etc.

The situation is getting more serious day by day. (= ... each day.)

And one can pay by the hour, by the day etc.

In this job we're paid by the hour.

You can hire a bicycle by the day or by the week.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark12>>118    by and near

By means ‘just at the side of; something that is by you may be closer
than something that is near you. Compare:

We live near the sea. (perhaps five kilometres away)

We live by the sea. (We can see it.)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark13>>119    by (method, agent) and with (tools
etc)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark14>>1 the difference

By and with can both be used to say how somebody does something, but
there is an important difference.

We use by to talk about an action - what we do to get a result. We use
with to talk about a tool or other object - what we use to get a result.
Compare: ►

-    I killed the spider by hitting it. (Note the -ing form after by.)

I killed the spider with a shoe, (not ... by a shoe.)

-    I got where I am by hard work. ~No you didn't. You got there with
your

wife's money.

Without is the opposite of both by and with in these cases. Compare:

-    I got her to listen by shouting.

It's difficult to get her to listen without shouting.

-    We'll have to get it out with a screwdriver.

We can't get it out without a screwdriver.

By is also used to refer to means of transport {by bus, by train etc).
See 70.1.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark15>>2 passive clauses

In passive clauses, by introduces the agent - the person or thing that
does the action (see 413).

I was interviewed by three directors.

My car was damaged by a falling branch.

We generally prefer with to refer to a tool or instrument used by
somebody. Compare:

He was killed by a heavy stone. (This could mean ^{4}A stone fell and
killed him^{1}.)

He was killed with a heavy stone. (This means 'Somebody used a stone to
kill him'.)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark16>>120    call

Call (with no object) can mean both 'telephone* and ‘visit*. This
sometimes causes confusion.

Alice called this morning. ~ You mean she came round or she phoned?

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark17>>121    can and could (1): introduction

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark18>>1 grammar

Can and could are modal auxiliary verbs (see 353-354).

a There is no -s in the third person singular.

She can swim very well, (not She cans...)

b Questions and negatives are made without do.

Can you swim? (not Do you can-swim?)

I couldn't understand her. (not L-didrit could...)

c After can and could, we use the infinitive of other verbs, without to.

I can speak a little Arabic, (not 1 can to speak...)

Do you think she can still be working? Its very late.

d Can and could have no infinitives or participles (tocan, canning, I
have could do not exist). When necessary, we use other words, for
example forms of be able (see 3) or be allowed (see 42).

I'd like to be able to stay here, (not ... to can stay...)

You'll be able to walk soon, (not You'll can ...)

I've always been able to play games well, (not I've always could...)

She's always been allowed to do what she liked.

e Could is sometimes used as the past of can.

When I was younger I could play tennis very well.

However, it can also be used as a less definite or conditional form of
can, referring to the present or future (see 122.6, 124.1,4-6).

Could I ask you something? (More polite than Can /...?)

What shall we do this eveningWe could go and see a film.

I could get a better job if I spoke French. (= I would be able to ...)

f Certain past ideas can be expressed by can or could followed by a
perfect infinitive (have + past participle). For details, see 122.7,
123.5 and 124.7.

I don't know where she can have gone.

That was dangerous - he could have kiUed somebody.

g Can has two pronunciations: a strong form /keen/ and a weak form
/kan/. Could has a strong form /kud/ and a weak form /kad/. The weak
pronunciation is used in most cases. For more details of strong and weak
pronunciations, see 616.

h Contracted negative forms (see 143) are can't (pronounced /ka:nt/ in
standard British English and /kaent/ in standard American English) and
couldn't (/'kudnt/). Cannot is usually written as one word in British
English.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark19>>2 meanings

Can and could are both used to talk about ability, to ask for and give
permission, and to make requests and offers.

Can you speak French? (ability)

You can stop work early today. (permission)

Could I have some more tea? (request)

Can I help you? (offer)

Could is also used to talk about the chances that something will happen,
or is happening. Can is not used in this way.

It could rain this afternoon. (not It-can-rain -this -afternoon.)

Can't is not only used to talk about ability or permission; it can also
express negative certainty (see 359.2).

It can't be true. (= It is not possible that it is true.)

With see, hear and some other verbs, can is used to give a kind of
present progressive meaning.

I can hear the sea. (not I-am hearing the sea.)

May and might are often used in similar ways to can and could. For the
main differences, see 345.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark20>>122 can and could (2): ability

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark21>>1 knowledge, skill, strength etc: / can read
Italian

We use can to say what people and things are able (or unable) to do
because of their knowledge, skill, strength, nature, design etc.

I can read Italian, but I can't speak it. These roses can grow anywhere.
Dogs can't climb trees.    Can gases freeze?    ►

Henry can lift 100 kilos.    My car can do 180kph.

Be able to (see 3) is used with similar meanings, especially when we are
talking about people's ability.

Henry is able to lift 100 kilos.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark22>>2    common or typical

We often use can to say what is common or typical.

Scotland can be very warm in September.

Ann can really get on your nerves sometimes.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark23>>3    possible in the situation: We can go to
Paris

We also use can to say what we are able (or unable) to do because of the
circumstances that we are in - what is possible in the situation.

We can go to Paris this weekend, because I don't have to work.

I can't come out this evening: I have to see my brother.

There are three possibilities: we can go to the police, we can talk to a
lawyer, or we can forget all about it What shall we do?~ We can try
asking Lucy for help.

Anybody who wants to can join the club.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark24>>4    past: She could read when she was four

We use could to talk about the past.

She could read when she was four My grandmother could sing like an angei
My last car could do 200kph.

In those days everybody could find a job.

It could be quite frightening if you were alone in our big old house.

Was able to is also possible, especially to talk about people's ability.

She was able to read when she was four.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark25>>5    past: could is not always possible

We use could for ‘general ability' - for example to say that somebody
could do something at any time, whenever he/she wanted.

When I was younger, I could run 10km in under 40 minutes.

We do not normally use could to say that somebody did something on one
occasion. Instead, we use other expressions.

I managed to run 10km yesterday in under an hour (not I could run 10km
yesterday-...)

How many eggs were you able to get? (not .. . could-you get?)

After six hours' climbing, we succeeded in getting to the top of the
mountain.

(not ... we could get to the top...)

I found a really nice dress in the sale. (not I could find...)

However, we use couldn't to say that something did not happen on one
occasion.

I managed to find the street, but I couldn't find her house.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark26>>6    other uses of could

Could is not only past: we also use it as a 'softer^{1}, less definite
form of can. What shall we do tomorrow?~ Well, we could go fishing When
you're in Spain, you could go and see Alex.

Could can mean ‘would be able to'.

You could get a better job if you spoke a foreign language.

Could is used in past indirect speech, when can was used in direct
speech. Can you help me?--- What did you say?---I asked if you could
help me.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark27>>7    could have...

We use a special structure to talk about unrealised past ability or
opportunities

- to say that somebody was able to do something, but did not try to do
it; or that something was possible, but did not happen.

could have + past participle

I could have married anybody I wanted to.

I was so angry I could have killed her!

Why did you jump out of the window? You could have hurt yourself I could
have won the race if I hadn't fallen.

This structure can be used to criticise people for not doing things.

You could have helped me - why did you just sit and watch?

Negative sentences suggest that somebody would not have been able to do
something even if they had wanted or tried to.

I couldn't have won, so I didn't go in for the race.

I couldn't have enjoyed myself more - it was a perfect day.

The structure is sometimes used to talk about past events which are not
certain to have happened (like may!might have - see 339.7).

Who sent those flowers?* I'm not sure. It could have been your mother.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark28>>8    chances: Will it happen? / Is it
happening? Can not used

We do not use can to talk about the chances (probability) that something
will actually happen, or is actually happening. Instead, we use may (see
339).

We may go camping this summer. (not We can go ...)

There may be a strike next week. (not Tfoere-eart-be-...)

Where's Sarah?She may be with Joe. (not Ske-eart-be-...)

Some of these desserts may contain alcohol, (not ... can contain ...)
However, could is possible in this sense.

It could rain later this evening, perhaps. (but not It can rain
later...)

I could possibly have a new job soon, (but not beartrpossibly have...)

For a comparison between can, could, may and might, see 345.

For can't used to express certainty (e.g. ft can*t be true), see 359.2.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark29>>123 can and could (3): ability (advanced
points)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark30>>1 future: can or will be able

We use can to talk about future actions which we will be able to do
because of present ability, present circumstances, present decisions
etc.

She can win the race tomorrow if she really tries.

I've bought the tent, so we can go camping next weekend if we want to.

I haven't got time today, but I can see you tomorrow.

Can you come to a party on Saturday?

In other cases we prefer other structures, for example will be able to.

I'll be able to speak French at the end of this course.

(not I can speak French ...)    ►

One day people will be able to go to the moon on holiday.

(or it will be possible to go ...)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark31>>2    could in the past

Could is not normally used to say that somebody did something on one
occasion in the past (see 122.5).

I managed to buy a really nice coat yesterday, (not I could buy a really
nice coatyesterday.)

However, could can refer to one occasion with certain verbs: see, hear,
taste, feel, smell_{f} understand, remember and guess (see 125),

I could smell something burning. I could understand everything she said
And we can use could to talk about one occasion with words like hardly
or only, that have a negative sense.

She could hardly believe her eyes.    I could only get six eggs.

Could can also sometimes refer to one occasion in subordinate clauses.

Vm so glad that you could come.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark32>>3    languages and instruments: She speaks
Greek

We often leave out can when we are talking about the ability to speak
languages or to play instruments.

She speaks Greek. / She can speak Greek.

Do/Can you play the piano?

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark33>>4    can/could always

Can/could always can mean ‘can/could ... if there is nothing better'.

I don't know what to get Mark for his birthday. * Well, you can always
give him a book token.

What are we going to eat?* We could always warm up that soup.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark34>>5    could have... for present situations

Could have + past participle can refer to present situations which were
possible but have not been realised.

He could have been Prime Minister now if he hadn't decided to leave
politics. We could have spent today at the seaside, but we thought it
was going to rain, so we decided not to.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark35>>124 can and could (4):

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark36>>interpersonal uses (permission, requests etc)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark37>>1 asking for and giving permission: Can I...?

We use can to ask for and give permission.

Can I ask you something?* Yes, of course you can.

You can go now if you want to.

Can't is used to refuse permission (often with other words to soften the
refusal.)

Can I have some more cake?* No, I'm afraid you can't.

We also use could to ask for permission; it is more polite or formal
them can. We do not use could to give or refuse permission (it suggests
respect, so is more natural in asking for permission than in giving it.)

Could I ask you something?* Yes, of course you can. (not ... of course
you

11 Jyt l

CVUIU'}

May and might are also used to ask and give permission (see 340). They
are more formal than canlcould. Some people consider them more
‘correct', but in fact can and could are normally preferred in informal
educated usage.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    talking about permission: Can everybody
park here?

Can and could are also used to talk about permission that has already
been given or refused, and about things that are (not) allowed by rules
and laws. (Note that may is not normally used to talk about rules and
laws - see 340.3.) She said I could come as often as I liked.

Can everybody park here? (not May-everybody park here?)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    past: could is not always possible

In talking about the past, we use could to say that somebody had
permission to do something at any time ('general permission'), but we do
not use could to talk about permission for one particular action in the
past. Compare:

When I was a child, I could watch TV whenever I wanted to.

Yesterday evening, Peter was allowed to watch TV for an hour, (not ...
Peter cotM-watch TV for an hour.)

But could not can be used to talk about one particular action.

Peter couldn't watch TV yesterday because he was naughty.

(The difference between could and wasi were allowed is similar to the
difference between could and was! were able - see 122.5.)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark40>>4    could = 'would be allowed'

Could has a conditional use (= would be allowed).

He could borrow my car if he asked.

Could have + past participle means ‘would have been allowed'.

I could have kissed her if Vd wanted to.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark41>>5    offers

We often use can when we offer to do things for people.

Can I carry your bag? ( = Would you like me to ...) ~Oh, thank you.

I can baby-sit for you this evening if you like.* No, it's all right,
thanks. Could is possible if we want an offer to sound less definite.

I could mend your bicycle for you, if that would help.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark42>>6    requests, orders and suggestions

We can use can and could to ask or tell people to do things. Could is
more polite, more formal or less definite, and is often used for making
suggestions. Can you put the children to bed?

Could you lend me five pounds until tomorrow?

Do you think you could help me for a few minutes?

When you've finished the washing-up you can clean the kitchen. Then you
could iron the clothes, if you like.

If you haven't got anything to do you could sort out your photos.    ►

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark43>>7    criticisms

Could can be used to criticise people for not doing things.

You could ask before you borrow my can Could have + past participle is
used for criticisms about the past.

You could have told me you were getting married.

For the use of might in similar cases, see 344.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark44>>8    indirect speech

Could is used in past indirect speech, when can was used in direct
speech. Can you give me a hand?* What?* I asked if you could give me a
hand.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark45>>125    can and could (5): with see, hear, etc

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark46>>1    see, hear, feel, smell, taste

When these verbs refer to perception (receiving information through the
eyes, ears etc), we do not normally use progressive forms. To talk about
seeing, hearing etc at a particular moment, we often use can see, can
hear etc (especially in British English).

I can see Susan coming. (not I'm-seemg-...)

Can you hear somebody coming up the stairs?

What did you put in the stew? I can taste something funny.

Suddenly she realised she could smell something burning.

In American English, I see/hear etc are common in this sense.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark47>>2    guess, tell

Can and could are often used with guess and with tell (meaning see,
know). Can!could are not normally used with know in the sense of ‘find
out*

(see 313.5).

I could guess what she wanted.

You can tell he's Irish from his accent, (not You can know...)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark48>>3    understand, follow, remember

Can/could is often used with these verbs too. It does not always add
very much to the meaning.

I can't/don't understand what she's talking about.

Do/Can you follow what he's saying?

I (can) remember your grandfather.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark49>>126    can't help

If you say that you cannot/can't help doing something, you mean that you
can't stop yourself, even if you don't want to do it.

She's a selfish woman, but somehow you can't help liking her.

Excuse me -1 couldn't help overhearing what you said.

Sorry I broke the cup -1 couldn't help it.

Can't help can be followed by but + infinitive without to (see 116.3),
with the same meaning as can't help .. .ing. This is common in American
English.

I can't help but wonder what I should do next.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark50>>127    care: take care (of), care (about) and
care for

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark51>>1    take care of

Take care of normally means ‘look after* or ‘take responsibility for'.

Nurses take care of people in hospital.

It's no good giving Peter a rabbit: he's too young to take care of it
properly. Ms Savage takes care of marketing and Vm responsible for
production. Take care (without a preposition) means ‘be careful*. Some
people use it as a formula when saying goodbye.

Take care when you're crossing the road, children.

Bye, Ruth. *Bye, Mike. Take care.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark52>>2    care (about)

Care (about) is used to say whether you feel something is important to
you. This is very common in negative sentences. About is used before an
object, but is usually left out before a conjunction.

Most people care about other people's opinions.

(not ... take care of/ carefor-otherpeople'-s opinions)

I don't care whether it rains - Tm happy.

I'll never speak to you again. don't care.

Your mother's upset with you. * I couldn't care less. (= I don't care at
all.)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark53>>3    care for

Care for can be used to mean ‘look after*.

He spent years caring for his sick mother.

Another meaning is ‘like* or ^{4}be fond of, but this is not very common
in modem English.

I don't much care for strawberries.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark54>>128    changes: become, get, go, grow, etc

Become_{t} get, go, come, grow and turn can all be used with similar
meanings to talk about changes. The differences between them are
complicated - they depend partly on grammar, partly on meaning and
partly on fixed usage.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark55>>1    become dark, become a pilot etc

Become can be used before adjectives and noun phrases.

It was becoming very dark.

What do you have to do to become a pilot?

Become is not usually used to talk about single deliberate actions.

Please get ready now. (not Please become ready now.)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark56>>2    get dark, younger etc

Get (informal) is very common before adjectives (without nouns).

It was getting very dark, (informal)

You get younger every day. (informal)

Get can also be used before past participles like lost, broken, dressed,
married. They got married in 1986, and got divorced two years later    *

We generally use go, not get, to talk about changes of colour and some
changes for the worse (like go mad) - see paragraph 4 below.

Get is not normally used before nouns to talk about changes.

I became a grandfather last week, (not / got-a-grandfather-...)

For gel used to, see 605.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark57>>3    get + infinitive

We can sometimes use get with an infinitive to talk about a gradual
change. After a few weeks I got to like the job better.

She's nice when you get to know her.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark58>>4    go red, go mad etc

Go can be used before adjectives to talk about change, especially in an
informal style. This is common in two cases.

a colours

Go (and not get) is used to talk about changes of colour.

Leaves go brown in autumn, (not Leaves get brown-...)

She went white with anger.

Suddenly everything went black and I lost consciousness.

Other examples: go blue with cold I red with embarrassment I green with
envy. Turn can also be used in these cases (see below), and so can grow
when the change is gradual. Go is more informal than turn and grow.

b changes for the worse

Go (not usually get) is used before adjecdves in some expressions that
refer to changes for the worse. People go mad (BrE), crazy, deaf, blind,
grey or bald; horses go lame; machines go wrong; iron goes rusty; meat,
fish or vegetables go bad; cheese goes mouldy; milk goes off or sour,
bread goes stale; beer, lemonade, musical instruments and car tyres go
flat.

He went bald in his twenties. The car keeps going wrong.

Note that we use get, not go, with old, tired and ill

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark59>>5    come true etc

Come is used in a few fixed expressions to talk about things finishing
up all right. The most common are come true and come right I'll make all
your dreams come true.

Trust me - it will all come right in the end.

Come + infinitive can be used to talk about changes in mental state or
attitude. I slowly came to realise that she knew what she was doing.

You will come to regret your decision.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark60>>6    grow old etc

Grow is used before adjectives especially to talk about slow and gradual
changes. It is more formal than get or go, and a little old-fashioned or
literary. Without noticing it he grew old

When they grew rich they began to drop their old friends.

As the weather grows colder, my thoughts turn to holidays in the sun.

Grow + infinitive can be used (like come + infinitive) to talk about
changes in attitude, especially if these are gradual.

He grew to accept his stepmother, but he never grew to love her.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark61>>7    turn red etc

Turn is used mostly for visible or striking changes of state. It is
common before colour words (and is not so informal as go).

She turned bright red and ran out of the room.

He turns nasty after he's had a couple of drinks.

We can use turn before numbers to talk about important changes of age.

I turned fifty last week. It's all downhill from now on.

Turn into is used before nouns.

He's a lovely man, but when he gets jealous he turns into a monster.

A girl has to kiss a lot of frogs before one of them turns into a
prince.

Turn to and turn into can both be used before the names of materials.
Everything that King Midas touched turned (in)to gold They stood there
as if they had been turned (in)to stone.

To talk about a change of occupation, religion, politics etc, we
sometimes use turn with a noun (with no preposition or article) or an
adjective.

He worked in a bank for thirty years before turning painter.

Towards the end of the war he turned traitor.

At the end of her life she turned Catholic.

Turn (in)to can also be used to talk about changing one thing into
another. In the Greek legend, Circe turned men into pigs.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark62>>8    fall ill etc

Fall is used to mean 'become' in fall ill, fall asleep and fall in love.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark63>>9    verbs related to adjectives: thicken,
brighten etc

A number of verbs which are related to adjectives have meanings like
'get more .. / or ‘make more .. Many of them end in -en. Examples:

The fog thickened.    They're widening the road here.

The weather's beginning to brighten up. His eyes narrowed Could you
shorten the sleeves on this jacket?

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark64>>10 no change: stay, keep, remain

To talk about things not changing, we can use stay, keep or remain
before adjectives. Remain is more formal.

How do you manage to stay young and fit?    Keep calm.

I hope you will always remain so charming.

Stay and remain are also sometimes used before noun phrases.

Promise me you will always stay/remain my little boy.

Keep can be used before -ing forms.

Keep smiling whatever happens.

For other uses of the words discussed in this section, see a good
dictionary.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark65>>129    city and town

Most people simply use city to talk about large and important towns
-examples in the UK are Belfast, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Glasgow,
Manchester, Liverpool and London.

City can be used in a more exact way to talk about a town that has been
given a special status by the king or queen (in Britain) or by the state
(in some other English-speaking countries).

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark66>>130    cleft sentences (1): What I need is a
holiday

We can emphasise particular words and expressions by putting everything
into a kind of relative clause except the words we want to emphasise:
this makes them stand out These structures are called 'cleft sentences'
by grammarians (cleft means ‘divided'). They are useful in writing
(because we cannot use intonation for emphasis in written language), but
they are also common in speech.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark67>>1    Mary is the person who..What I need
is...

The words to be emphasised are joined to the relative clause by is! was
and an expression like the person who, or what (= the thing that).

We can put the words to be emphasised first or last in the sentence.
Compare:

-    mary kept a pig in the garden shed.

Mary was the person who kept a pig in the garden shed.

The person who kept a pig in the garden shed was Mary.

-    Mary kept a PIG in the garden shed.

A pig was what Mary kept in the garden shed.

What Mary kept in the garden shed was a pig.

-    Phil is THE SECRETARY.

The secretary is what Phil is.

What Phil is is the secretary.

Instead of the person or what, we can use less general expressions.

You're the woman (that) I'll always love best.

Casablanca is a film (that) I watch again and again.

A what-clause is normally considered to be singular; if it begins a
cleft sentence it is followed by is/was. But a plural verb is sometimes
possible before a plural noun in an informal style.

What we want is/are some of those cakes.

For more information about uz/iat-clauses, see 497.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark68>>2    the place where ..the day when ..the
reason why...

We can use these expressions to emphasise a place, time or reason.

-    Mary kept a pig IN THE GARDEN SHED.

The garden shed was the place where Mary kept a pig.

The place where Mary kept a pig was the garden shed

-    Jake went to London ON TUESDAY to see Colin.

Tuesday was the day when/that Jake went to London to see Colin.

The day when Jake went to London to see Colin was Tuesday.

-    Jake went to London on Tuesday TO SEE COUN.

To see Colin was the reason why Jake went to London on Tuesday.

The reason why Jake went to London on Tuesday was to see Colin.

The place, the day or the reason can be dropped in an informal style,
especially in the middle of a sentence.

Spain's where we're going this yean

Why I'm here is to talk about my plans. (More formal: The reason why I'm
here is...)

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark69>>3    emphasising verbs: What he did was ...

When we want to emphasise a verb (or an expression beginning with a
verb), we have to use a more complicated structure with what...do.
Infinitives with and without to are possible.

-    He SCREAMED.

What he did was (to) scream.

-    She WRITES SCIENCE FICTION.

What she does is (to) write science fiction.

Instead of an infinitive, we often use subject + verb in an informal
style. What she does is, she writes science fiction.

What I'll do is, I'll phone John and ask his advice.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark70>>4    emphasising a whole sentence

A whole sentence can be given extra emphasis by using a cleft structure
with what and the verb happen. Compare:

The car broke down.

What happened was (that) the car broke down.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark71>>5    other structures

All (that), and expressions with thing, can be used in cleft sentences.

All I want is a home somewhere.    All you need is love.

All (that) I did was (to) touch the window, and it broke.

The only thing I remember is a terrible pain in my head The first thing
was to make some coffee.

My first journey abroad is something I shall never forget.

Time expressions can be emphasised with It was not until... and It was
only

when.

It was not until I met you that I knew real happiness.

It was only when I read her letter that I realised what was happening.

At the beginning of a cleft sentence, this and that often replace
emphasised here and there. Compare:

- You pay here.

This is where you pay.

(or Here is where you pay.)

We live there.

That's where we live.

(or There's where we live.)

For more about question-word clauses, see 465.

For more general information about sentence structure and the
arrangement of information in sentences, see 512.

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark72>>131    cleft sentences (2): it was my
secretary who ...

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark73>>1    preparatory it

We can use preparatory it (see 446) in cleft sentences. The words to be
emphasised are usually joined to the relative clause by that.

Compare:

My secretary sent the bill to Mr Harding yesterday.

It was my secretary that sent the bill to Mr Harding yesterday.

(not somebody else)

It was the bill that my secretary sent to Mr Harding yesterday.

(not something else)

It was Mr Harding that my secretary sent the bill to yesterday.

(not to somebody else)

It was yesterday that my secretary sent the bill to Mr Harding.

(not another day)

Negative structures are also possible.

It wasn't my husband that sent the bill...

Who is possible instead of that when a personal subject is emphasised.

It was my secretary who sent...

When a plural subject is emphasised, the verb is plural.

It was the students that were angry... (not ... that was angry...)

The verb cannot be emphasised with this structure: we cannot say It was
sent that my secretary the bill... .

<<main-8.xhtml#bookmark74>>2    It is I who ... \ It is me that...

When an emphasised subject is a pronoun, there are two possibilities.
Compare:

-    It is I who am responsible. (formal)

It's me that's/who's responsible, (informal)

-    It is you who are in the wrong. (formal)

It's you that's in the wrong, (informal)

To avoid being either too formal or too informal in this case, we could
say, for example,

I'm the person i the one who's responsible.

<<main-9.xhtml>>

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark0>>132    close and shut

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark1>>1 use

Close /klduz/ and shut can often be used with the same meaning.

Open your mouth and close/shut your eyes.

I can't close/shut the window. Can you help me?

The shop closes/shuts at Jive o'clock.

You can shut_{t} but not close, somebody/something in or out of a place.

I shut the letters in my desk drawer and locked it. (not I closed the
letters...) She shut him out of the house.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    past participles

The past participles closed and shut can be used as adjectives.

The post office is closed/shut on Saturday afternoon.

Shut is not usually used before a noun.

a closed door (not a shut door)    closed eyes (not shut- eyes)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    cases where dose is preferred

We prefer close for slow movements (like flowers closing at night), and
close is more common in a formal style.

As we watched, he closed his eyes for the last time.

Compare:

Close your mouth, please, (dentist to patient)

Shut your mouth! (a rude way of saying ‘Be quiet!')

We close roads, railways etc (channels of communication). And we close
(= end) letters, bank accounts, meetings etc.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark4>>133    cloth and clothes

Cloth (pronounced /kln0/) is material made from wool, cotton etc, used
for making clothes, curtains, soft furnishings and so on. (In informal
English, it is more common to say material or fabric.)

His suits were made of the most expensive cloth.

A cloth is a piece of material used for cleaning, covering things etc.

Could you pass me a cloth? I've spilt some milk on the floor.

Clothes (pronounced /klauOz/) are things you wear: skirt, trousers etc.
Clothes has no singular; instead of a clothe, we say something to wear
or an article / a piece of clothing.

I must buy some new clothes; I haven't got anything to wear.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark5>>134    come and go

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark6>>1    speaker's/hearer's position

We use come for movements to the place where the speaker or hearer is.
Maria, would you come here, please?*I'm coming, (not ... Fmgoing:) When
did you come to live here?

(on the phone): Can I come and see you?

We use go for movements to other places.

I want to go and live in Greece.    Let's go and see Peter and Diane.

In 1577, he went to study in Rome.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark7>>2    speaker's/hearer's past or future
position

We can use come for a movement to a place where the speaker or hearer
already was or will be at the time of the movement. Compare:    »>

-    What time did I come to see you in the office yesterday?

I went to John's office yesterday, but he wasn't in,

-    Will you come and visit me in hospital when I have my operation?

He's going into hospital next week.

-    Susan can't come to your birthday party.

She's going to see her mother.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark8>>3    joining a movement

Come (with) can be used to talk about joining a movement of the
speaker's/ hearer's, even if go is used for the movement itself.

We're going to the cinema tonight. Would you like to come with us?

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark9>>4    somebody else's position

Sometimes when we are talking about somebody else (not the speaker or
hearer), that person can become the centre of our attention. In that
case, we use come for movements to the place where he/she is (or was or
will be). This often happens in stories.

He waited till four o'clock> but she didn't come.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark10>>5    come to; come from

Come to can mean arrive at.

Carry straight on till you come to a crossroads.

Come from is used (in the present) to say where people's homes are or
were. She comes from Scotland, but her mother's Welsh.

Originally I come from Hungary, but I've lived here for twenty years.

(not Originally I came from Hungary...)

The difference between bring and take is similar. See 112.

For come/go and..see 53.

For comet go .. .ing, see 228. For been - cornel gone, see 95.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark11>>135 comparison (1): structures

Various words and structures can be used for comparing.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark12>>1    similarity and identity: as, like, so do
I, too, the same, etc

If we want to say that people, things, actions or events are similar, we
can use as or like (see 326); so!neither do I and similar structures
(see 541); or adverbs such as too_{t} also and as well (see 46). To say
that they are identical, we can use the same (as) (see 503).

He liked working with horses, as his father did.

Your sister looks just like you. The papers were late and the post was
too. She likes music, and so do /. His eyes are just the same colour as
mine.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    equality: as... as

To say that people, things etc are equal in a particular way, we often
use the structure as (much!many) ... as (see 136).

My hands were as cold as ice. I earn as much money as you.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark14>>3    inequality: more ... than; older...
than; most, oldest, etc

To say that people, things etc are unequal in a particular way, we can
use comparative adjectives and adverbs, or more + adjective/adverb (see
137-141).

He's much older than her.    The baby's more attractive than you.

To say which one of a group is outstanding in a particular way, we can
use a superlative or most + adjective/adverb (see 137-141).

You're the laziest and most annoying person in the whole office.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark15>>4    inequality: less, least, not solas ...as

We can also talk about inequality by looking at the ‘lower' end of the
scale. One possibility is to use less (than) (see 320) or least (see
318).

The baby's less ugly than you.

I want to spend the least possible time working.

In informal usage, we more often use not so ... as or not as ... as (see
136). The baby's not so ugly as you.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark16>>136 comparison (2): as ... as; as much/many
as

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark17>>1    use

We use as... as to say that people or things are equal in some way.

She's as tall as her brother.    Is it as good as you expected?

She speaks French as well as the rest of us

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark18>>2    negative structures

After not, we can use so ... as instead of as ... as.

He's not as/so friendly as she is. (more informal than He's less
friendly...)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark19>>3    as ... as + adjective/adverb

Note the structure as ... as + adjective/adverb.

Please get here as soon as possible.

I'll spend as much as necessary. You're as beautiful as ever.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark20>>4    pronouns after as

In an informal style we can use object pronouns {me, him etc) after as.

She doesn't sing as well as me.

In a formal style, we prefer subject + verb after as.

She doesn't sing as well as I do.

A subject form without a verb (e.g. as well as he) is unusual in this
structure in modem English.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark21>>5    as much/many ...as

We can use as muchfmany... as to talk about quantity.

I haven't got as much money as I thought.

We need as many people as possible.

As much/many can be used without following nouns.

I ate as much as 1 could. She didn't catch as many as she'd hoped.

And as much ... can be used as an adverb.

You ought to rest as much as possible.    ►

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark22>>6    emphatic use: as much as 80kg

As much!many as can be used before a number to mean ‘the large amount/
quantity'.

Some of these fish can weigh as much as 80kg

There are sometimes as many as 40 students in the classes.

As little!few can be used to mean 'the small amount/quantity*.

You can fly to Paris for as little as 20 euros.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark23>>7    half as ... as etc

Half twice, three times etc can be used before as... as.

You're not half as clever as you think you are.

Vm not going out with a man who's twice as old as me.

It took three times as long as I expected. (or ... three times longer
than I expected - see 141.3)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark24>>8    modification

Before as... as we can use (not) nearly, almost, just, nothing like,
every bit, exactly, not quite.

It's not nearly as cold as yesterday:    He's just as strong as ever.

You're nothing like as bad-tempered as you used to be.

She's every bit as beautiful as her sister.

I'm not quite as tired as I was last week.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark25>>9    infinitives

Where as... as is used with two infinitives, the second is often without
to. It's as easy to do it right as (to) do it wrong

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark26>>10    tenses

In as... as-clauses (and other kinds of as-clauses), a present tense is
often used to refer to the future, and a past tense can have a
conditional meaning (see 580).

We'll get there as soon as you do/wiU.

If you married me, I'd give you as much freedom as you wanted.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark27>>11    leaving out the second part

The second part of the as ... as or so... as structure can be left out
when the meaning is clear from what comes before.

The train takes 40 minutes. By car it'll take you twice as long.

I used to think he was clever. Now Vm not so sure.

In cases like this, not so is much more common than not as.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark28>>12    traditional expressions

We use the structure as ... as ... in a lot of traditional comparative
expressions.

as cold as ice    as hard as nails

as black as night as ... as hell The first as can be dropped in these
expressions in an informal style.

She's hard as nails.

I'm tired as hell of listening to your problems.

Note that as is usually pronounced /az/ (see 616).

For as long as, see 75. For as well as, see 78.

For the word order in sentences like She's as good a dancer as her
brother, see 14. For as replacing subject or object (e.g. as many people
as want it), see 581.

For other comparative structures, see 137-141.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark29>>137 comparison (3):

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark30>>comparative and superlative adjectives

One-syllable adjectives normally have comparatives and superlatives
ending in -er, -est Some two-syllable adjectives are similar; others
have more and most. Longer adjectives have more and most.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark31>>1 one-syllable adjectives (regular
comparison)

Adjective Comparative Superlative

| old     | older     | oldest     | Most adjectives: + -er, -est                   |
|         |           |            |                                                |
| tall    | taller    | tallest    |                                                |
|         |           |            |                                                |
| cheap   | cheaper   | cheapest   |                                                |
| late    | later     | latest     | Adjectives ending in -e:                       |
| nice    | nicer     | nicest     | + -r, -st.                                     |
| fat     | fatter    | fattest    | One vowel + one consonant: double consonant.   |
|         |           |            |                                                |
| big     | bigger    | biggest    |                                                |
|         |           |            |                                                |
| thin    | thinner   | thinnest   |                                                |

Note the pronunciation of: younger /'jAi]g8(r)/ youngest /'jAggist/
longer/'\T)T)Q3(r)l longest /'loggist/ stronger /'strDi]ga(r)/ strongest
/'stroqgist/

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark32>>2 irregular comparison

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Adjective

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Comparative

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Superlative

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

good

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

better

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

best

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

bad

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

worse

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

worst

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ill

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

worse

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

far

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

farther 1 further farthest/furthest (see 201)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

old

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

older! elder (see 176)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

oldest/eldest

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

►

The determiners little and muchlmany have irregular comparatives and
superlatives:

little (see 329)    less (see 320) least (see 318)

muchlmany (see 357) more (see 355) most (see 356)

Few has two possible comparatives and superlatives: fewer! less and
fewest! least. See 320, 318.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark33>>3    two-syliable adjectives

Adjectives ending in -y have -ier and -iest. happy happier happiest easy
easier easiest Some other two-syllable adjectives can have -er and -est,
especially adjectives ending in an unstressed vowel, /l/ or /3(r)/.
narrow narrower narrowest simple simpler simplest clever cleverer
cleverest quiet quieter quietest With many two-syllable adjectives (e.g.
polite, common), -er!-est and more! most are both possible. With others
(including adjectives ending in -ing, -ed, -fid and -less), only
more!most is possible. In general, the structure with more! most is
becoming more common. To find out the normal comparative and superlative
for a particular two-syllable adjective, check in a good dictionary.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark34>>4    longer adjectives

Adjectives of three or more syllables have more and most, intelligent
more intelligent most intelligent practical more practical most
practical beautiful more beautiful most beautiful Words like unhappy
(the opposites of two-syllable adjectives ending in -y) are an
exception: they can have forms in -er and -est.

unhappy unhappier / more unhappy unhappiest / most unhappy untidy
untidier / more untidy    untidiest / most untidy

Some compound adjectives like good-looking or well-known have two
possible comparatives and superlatives.

good-looking better-looking    best-looking

o r more good-looking most good- looking well-known better-known
   best-known

or more well-known most well-known

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark35>>5    more, most with short adjectives

Sometimes more! most are used with adjectives that normally have
-er!-est. This can happen, for example, when a comparative is not
followed immediately by than; forms with -er are also possible.

The road's getting more and more steep, (or ... steeper and steeper.)

When we compare two descriptions (saying that one is more suitable or
accurate than another), we use more; comparatives with -er are not
possible.

He's more lazy than stupid (not He's lazier than stupid)

In a rather formal style, most can be used with adjectives expressing
approval and disapproval (including one-syllable adjectives) to mean
Very*.

Thank you very much indeedThat is most kind of you. (not ... That-ts
kindest of you:)

Real, right, wrong and like always have more and most

She's more like her mother than her father, (not ... liker her
mother...)

For information about how to use comparatives and superlatives, see 139,
141.

For modification of comparatives and superlatives (e.g. much older, far
the best), see 140.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark36>>138    comparison (4):

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark37>>comparative and superlative adverbs

Most comparative and superlative adverbs are made with more and most
Could you talk more quietly? (not ... quietlier)

Adverbs that have the same form as adjectives (see 27), and a few
others, have comparatives and superlatives with -er and -est. The most
common are: fast early, late, hard, long, near, high, low, soon_{t} well
(better, best), badly {worse, worst), and in informal English easy,
slow, loud and quick.

Can't you drive any faster?    Can you come earlier?

Talk louder, (informal)

We've all got terrible voices; but I sing worst of all.

Note also the irregular comparatives and superlatives of far {farther/
further, farthest1 furthest see 201), much (more, most, see 355 and
356), little (less, least, see 320 and 318).

For the use of comparatives and superlatives, see the following
sections.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark38>>139    comparison (5):

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark39>>using comparatives and superlatives

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark40>>1    than

After comparatives we use than, not that or as.

Today's hotter than yesterday. (not ..hoHer-that.. or ... hotter as...)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark41>>2    the difference between comparatives and
superlatives

We use a comparative to compare one person, thing, action, event or
group with another person, thing etc. We use a superlative to compare
somebody/ something with the whole group that he/she/it belongs to.

Compare:

-    Mary's taller than her three sisters.

Mary's the tallest of the four girls. (not .. .-the-tatier...)

-    Your accent is worse than mine.

Your accent is the worst in the class, (not ... the worse...)

-    He plays better than everybody else in the team.

He's the best in the team.    ►

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark42>>3    groups with two members

When a group only has two members, we sometimes use a comparative
instead of a superlative.

I like Betty and Maud, but I think Maud's the nicerfnicest of the two.

I'll give you the bigger/biggest steak: I'm not very hungry.

Some people feel that a superlative is incorrect in this case.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark43>>4    double comparatives: fatter and fatter,
more and more slowly

We can use double comparatives to say that something is changing.

I'm getting fatter and fatter.

We're going more and more slowly, (not ... more slowly and-more slowly.)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark44>>5    the»»• the ■«»

We can use comparatives with the... the... to say that things change or
vary together.

Word order (in both clauses):

the + comparative expression + subject + verb

The older I get, the happier I am. (not Older I get, more l-am-happy.)

The more dangerous it is, the more I like it (not The more it is
dangerous,...)

The more I study, the less I learn.

More can be used with a noun in this structure.

The more money he makes, the more useless things he buys.

In longer structures, that is sometimes used before the first verb.

The more information that comes in, the more confused the picture is.

A short form of this structure is used in the expression The more the
merrier, and in sentences ending the better.

How do you like your coffee?* The stronger the better.

Note that in this structure, the word the is not really the definite
article - it was originally a form of the demonstrative pronoun, meaning
‘by that much\

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark45>>6    than me; than I (am)

In an informal style, object pronouns (me etc) are used after than. In a
more formal style, subject pronouns (/ etc) are used (usually with
verbs).

She's older than me. (informal)    She is older than I (am), (formal)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark46>>7    the happiest man in the world

After superlatives, we do not usually use of with a singular word
referring to a place or group.

I'm the happiest man in the world. (not .. . of the world.)

She's the fastest player in the team, (not .. .-of-the-team:)

But of can be used before plurals, and before lot.

She's the fastest player of them alt    He's the best of the lot

Note also the structure with possessive's.

He thinks he's the worlds strongest man.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark47>>8 than anybody, the best... ever

‘Non-affirmative' words like ever, yet and any (see 381) often follow
comparatives and superlatives.

You're more stubborn than anybody I know.

It's the best book I've ever read.    This is my hardest job yet

For the formation of comparatives and superlatives, see 137.

For tenses after than, see 580.

For the first!second!best etc + present/past perfect, see 591.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark48>>140 comparison (6): much, far etc with
comparatives and superlatives

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark49>>1    much, far etc with comparatives

We cannot use very with comparatives. Instead, we use, for example,
much, far, very much, a lot (informal), lots (informal), any and no (see
57), rather, a little, a bit (informal), and even.

My boyfriend is much/far older than me. (not ... very older than me.)
Russian is muchffar more difficult than Spanish, very much nicer
   rather more quickly

a bit more sensible (informal) She looks no older than her daughter, a
lot happier (informal)    a little less expensive

Is your mother any better? Your cooking is even worse than Harry's.
Quite cannot be used with comparatives except in the expression quite
better, meaning ‘recovered from an illness' (see 104.1). Any, no, a bit
and a lot are not normally used to modify comparatives before nouns.

There are muchffar nicer shops in the town centre. (but not ... a bk
nicer shops...)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark50>>2    many more/less/fewer

When more (see 355) modifies a plural noun, it is modified by many
instead of much. Compare:

much / far f a lot etc more money many / far I a lot etc more
opportunities Many is sometimes used to modify less (before a plural
noun) and fewer, but this is unusual; far_{t} a lot etc are more common.

far less words (more common than many less words) a lot fewer accidents
(more common than many fewer accidents)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark51>>3    much, by far, quite etc with
superlatives

Superlatives can be modified by much and by far, and by other adverbs of
degree such as quite (meaning ‘absolutely'), almost, practically, nearly
and easily.

He's much the most imaginative of them all.

She's by far the oldest

We're walking by far the slowest

He's quite the most stupid man I've ever met

I'm nearly the oldest in the firm.

This is easily the worst party I've been to this year.    ►

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark52>>4 very with superlatives

Note the special use of very to emphasise superlatives and first, next
and last. Bring out your very best wine - Michaels coming to dinner.

You're the very first person I've spoken to today.

This is your very last chance.

For modification of too, see 595.3.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark53>>141 comparison (7): advanced points

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark54>>1    comparative meaning 'relatively', 'more
than average'

Comparatives can suggest ideas like ‘relatively', ‘more than average*.
Used like this, comparatives make a less clear and narrow selection than
superlatives. Compare:

There are two classes - one for the cleverer students and one for the
slower learners.

The cleverest students were two girls from York.

Comparatives are often used in advertising to make things sound less
definite. less expensive clothes for the fuller figure (Compare cheap
clothes for fat people)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    all/any/none the + comparative

All the + comparative suggests the idea of ‘even more ..

I feel all the better for that swim.

Her accident made it all the more important to get home fast Any and
none can be used in similar structures.

He didn't seem to be any the worse for his experience.

He explained it all carefully, but I was still none the wiser.

Note that this structure is used mainly to express abstract ideas. We
would not say, for example, Those pills have made him all the slimmer.

In this structure, the was originally a demonstrative, meaning ‘by
that*.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark56>>3    three times .. .er etc

Instead of three/four etc times as much (see 136.7), we can use
three/four etc times + comparative.

She can walk three times faster than you.

It was ten times more difficult than I expected.

Note that twice and half are not possible in this structure.

She's twice as lively as her sister, (not ... twice livelier...)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark57>>4    words left out after than

Than often replaces a subject or object pronoun or an adverbial
expression, rather like a relative pronoun or adverb (see 581).

She spent more money than was sensible, (not ... than it was sensible.)
There were more people than we had expected, (not .. . than we had
expected them.)

I love you more than she does, (not .. -than how-much she does.)

(In some English dialects, the above sentences would be constructed with
than what)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark58>>5    the youngest person to ...

After a superlative, an infinitive can mean the same as a relative
clause.

She's the youngest person ever to swim the Channel (= ... the youngest
person who has ever swum ...)

This structure is also common after first, last and next Who was the
first woman to climb Everest?

The next to speak was Mrs Fenshaw.

Note that this structure is only possible in cases where the noun with
the superlative (or first etc) has a subject relationship with the
following verb. In other cases, infinitives cannot be used.

Is this the first time that you have stayed here? (not ...
the-first-time for you to stay here: time is not the subject of stay.)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark59>>6    the with superlatives

Nouns with superlative adjectives normally have the article the.

It's the best book I've ever read.

After link verbs, superlative adjectives also usually have the, though
it is sometimes dropped in an informal style.

Vm the greatest.    Which of the boys is (the) strongest?

This dictionary is (the) best The cannot be dropped when a superlative
is used with a defining expression. This dictionary is the best I could
find, (not This dictionary- is-best I could find.)

However, we do not use the with superlatives when we compare the same
person or thing in different situations. Compare:

-    Of all my friends, he's (the) nicest, (comparing different people)

He's nicest when he's with children. (not He's-tke-nieesHvkenr...: we're
comparing the same person in different situations.)

-    She works (the) hardest in the family; her husband doesn't know
what work

is. (A woman is being compared with a man - the is possible.)

She works hardest when she's doing something for her family.

(not She works-thr-hardest when ..- a woman's work is being compared in
different situations.)

The is sometimes dropped before superlative adverbs in an informal
style. Who can run (the) fastest?

For tenses after than, see 580.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark60>>142 continual(ly) and continuous(ly)

Continual(ly) is generally used for things that happen repeatedly, often
annoyingly.

I can't work with these continual interruptions.

She's continually taking days off.

Continuous(ly) is used for things that continue without stopping.

There has been continuous fighting on the border for the last 48 hours.

I've been working almost continuously since yesterday evening.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark61>>143 contractions

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark62>>1    general rules

Forms like I've, don't are called ‘contractions'. There are two kinds,
noun/pronoun etc + (auxiliary) verb

Vm tired.    My father's not very well

Do you know when you'll arrive?    Where's the station?

Vve no idea.    There's a problem.

She'd like to talk to you.    Somebody's coming.

Here's our bus.

(auxiliary) verb + not

They aren't ready.    / haven't seen him for ages.

You won't be late, will you? Can't you swim?

Contractions are formed with auxiliary verbs, and also with be and
sometimes have when these are not auxiliary verbs.

The short form *s (= is /has) can be written after nouns (including
proper names), question words, here and now as well as pronouns and
unstressed there. The short forms '11, ^{f}d and 're are commonly
written after pronouns and unstressed there, but in other cases we more
often write the full forms (especially in British English), even if the
words would be contracted in pronunciation.

Your mother will (/'mAdarl/) be surprised\ she said.

I wondered what had (/'woted/) happened.

Contractions are not usually written with double subjects.

John and 1 have decided to split up. (not John and Vve decided ...)

The apostrophe (') goes in the same place as the letters that we leave
out: has not - hasn't (not ha^{I}sne). But note that shan't (BrE - shall
not) and won't (= will not) only have one apostrophe each.

Contractions are common and correct in informal writing: they represent
the pronunciation of informal speech. They are not generally used in a
formal style.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark63>>2    alternative contractions

Some negative expressions can have two possible contractions. For she
had not we can say she'd not or she hadn't, for he will not we can say
he'll not or he won't. The two negative forms of be (e.g. she isn't and
she's not) are both common in British English; American English prefers
the forms with not (e.g. she's not). With other verbs, forms with n't
(e.g. she hadn't) are more common in most cases in standard southern
British English; they axe the only forms normally used in AmE. (Forms
with not - e.g. she'd not - tend to be more common in northern and
Scottish English.)

Double contractions are not normally written: she'sn't is impossible.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark64>>3    position

Contractions in the first group (noun / pronoun / question word +
auxiliary verb) do not normally come at the ends of clauses.

- Vm late.    - Vve forgotten.

Yes, you are. (not Yes,-you're.)    Yes, you have, (not Yes, you've.)

Negative contractions can come at the ends of clauses.

They really aren't. No, I haven't

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark65>>list of contractions

| Contraction       | Pronunciation   | Meaning           |
| I'm               | /aim/           | 1 am              |
| Vve               | /arv/           | I have            |
| I'll              | /ail /          | I will            |
| I'd               | /aid /          | 1 had/would       |
| you're            | /jo:(r)/        | you are           |
| you've            | /ju:v/          | you have          |
| you'll            | /ju:l/          | you will          |
| you'd             | /ju:d/          | you had/would     |
| he's              | /hi:z/          | he is/has         |
| he'll             | /hi;l, hil/     | he will           |
| he'd              | /hi:d/          | he had/would      |
| she's             | /Jiiz/          | she is/has        |
| she'll            | /Jiil, Jil/     | she will          |
| she'd             | /Ji:d/          | she had/would     |
| it's              | /its/           | it is/has         |
| it'd (uncommon)   | /'itad/         | it had /would     |
| we're             | /wia(r)/        | we are            |
| we've             | /wi:v/          | we have           |
| we'll             | /wid, wil/      | we will           |
| we'd              | /wi:d/          | we had/would      |
| they're           | /dea(r)/        | they are          |
| they've           | /6eiv/          | they have         |
| they'll           | /fell, 5el/     | they will         |
| they'd            | /deid/          | they had/would    |
| there's           | /daz/           | there is/has      |
| there'll          | /Oal/           | there will        |
| there'd           | /6ad/           | there had/would   |
| aren't            | /a:nt/          | are not           |
| can't             | /ka:nt/         | cannot            |
| couldn't          | /'kudnt/        | could not         |
| daren't           | /deant/         | dare not          |
| didn't            | /‘didnt/        | did not           |
| doesn't           | /'dAznt/        | does not          |
| don't             | /daunt/         | do not            |
| hadn't            | /'haednt/       | had not           |
| hasn't            | /‘haeznt/       | has not           |
| haven't           | /'haevnt/       | have not          |
| isn't             | /'iznt/         | is not            |
| mightn't          | /‘maitnt/       | might not         |
| mustn't           | /‘mAsnt/        | must not          |
| needn't           | /‘nirdnt/       | need not          |
| oughtn't          | /‘oitnt/        | ought not         |

Contraction    Pronunciation Meaning

shan't    /Jarnt/    shall not

shouldn't    /'Judnt/    should not

usedn't    /'juisnt/    used not

wasn't    /'WDznt/    was not

weren't    /w3:nt/    were not

won't    /waunt/    will not

wouldn't    /'wudnt/    would not

Notes

1.    Do not confuse it's (= it is!has) and its (possessive).

2.    Am not is only normally contracted in questions to aren't (BrE)
(/a:nt/).

I'm late, aren't I?

3.    Note the difference in pronunciation of can't in British English
(/ka:nt/) and American English (/kaent/).

4.    Daren't, shan't and usedn't are not often used in American
English.

5.    In non-standard English, ain't (pronounced /emt/ or /ent/) is used
as a contraction of am not_{t} are not, is not, have not and has not.

I ain't going to tell him.

Don't talk to me like that - you ain't my boss.

It's raining*No it ain't

I ain't got no more cigarettes.

Bill ain't been here for days.

6.    For the contraction let's, see 323.

7.    May not is not normally contracted: mayn't is very rare.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark66>>144 contrary

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark67>>1    on the contrary and on the other hand

On the contrary is used to contradict - to say that what has been said
or suggested is not true. If we want to give the other side of a
question, we use on the other hand, not on the contrary. Compare:

-    I suppose the job was boring?* On the contrary, it was really
exciting.

The job was boring, but on the other hand it was well paid, (not ... on
the

contraryrit was-weH-paid:)

-    He did not make things easy for his parents. On the contrary, he
did

everything he could to annoy and worry them.

He did not make things easy for his parents. On the other hand he could
often be wonderfully sweet and loving.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark68>>2    contrary and opposite

We use opposite (see 401), not contrary, to talk about contrasting
words. ‘Short* is the opposite of ‘tali', and also of ‘long'.

(not ... the contrary of ‘tali'...)

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark69>>145    control

Control is a ‘false friend' for people who speak some languages. It
generally means manage, direct, not check or inspect. Compare:

-    The crowd was too big for the police to control (= ... to keep in
order.) The police were checking everybody's papers, (not ...
controlling everybody's

papers:)

-    I found the car difficult to control at high speeds.

I took the car to the garage and asked them to have a look at the
steering. (not ... to control the steering.)

However, the noun control is used with the meaning of 'inspection point'
in expressions like passport! customs control.

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark70>>146    correspondence (1): letters

Each culture has its own way of organising a letter and arranging it on
a page. English-speaking people generally observe the following rules.

1    Put your own address at the top on the right. Addresses generally
follow the rule of ‘smallest first': house number, then street, then
town. Postcode and telephone number / fax number / email address come
last. Don't put your name with the address.

2    Put the date directly under the address. A common way to write the
date is to put the number of the day, followed by the month and year
(e.g. 17 May 2005). For other ways (and differences between British and
American customs)

see 152.

3    In formal letters and business letters, put the name and address of
the person you are writing to on the left side of the page, starting on
the same level as the date or slightly below.

4    Different styles are common in formal letters on paper which has
the address ready-printed at the top of the page. For example, the date
may be put on the left, and the address of the person written to may
come at the end of the letter or of the first page.

5    Begin the letter (Dear X) on the left. Common ways of addressing
people are:

•    by first name (informal): Dear Penny

•    by tide and surname (more formal): Dear Ms Hopkins

•    Dear Sir(s), Dear Sir or Madam, Dear Madam (especially to somebody
whose name is not known)

Some people like to use the first name and surname (Dear Penny Hopkins)
when writing to strangers or people that they do not know well.

Do not use a title like Mr together with a first name (not Dear Mr James
Carter).    »

6    After 'Dear X', put a comma or nothing at all, not an exclamation
mark (!). Either leave an empty line after ‘Dear X' and start again on
the left, or start again on the next line, a few spaces from the left.
Do the same for each new paragraph. (The first method is now the most
common in Britain.)

7    Letters which begin Dear Sir(s) or Dear Madam usually finish Yours
faithfully in British English. Formal letters which begin with the
person's name (e.g. Dear Miss Hawkins, Dear Peter Lewis) usually finish
Yours sincerely. Common American endings are Sincerely yours or
Sincerely. Informal letters may finish, for example, Yours, See you or
Love. (Love is not usually used by one man to another.) In formal
letters, many people put a closing formula before Yours.. especially
when writing to people they know: common expressions are With best
wishes and With kind regards.

8    Sign with your first name (informal) or your full name (formal),
but without writing any title (Mr!Ms!Dr etc). Ways of writing one's full
name: Alan Forbes, A Forbes, A f Forbes.

In a formal typewritten letter, add your full typewritten name after
your handwritten signature. Friendly business letters are often signed
with the first name only above the full typewritten name:

Yours sincerely Alan

Alan Forbes

9    In informal letters, afterthoughts that are added after the
signature are usually introduced by P S (Latin post scriptum = written
afterwards).

10    On the envelope, put the first name before the surname. People
usually write a title {Mr, Mrs etc) before the name. You can write the
first name in fiill {Mrs Angela Brookes), or you can write one or more
initials {Mrs A E Brookes). It was once common to put the abbreviated
title Esq (= Esquire) after a man's name; this is now very unusual.

11    British people now usually write abbreviated titles, initials,
addresses, dates, and opening and closing formulae without commas or
full stops.

12    American usage is different from British in some ways:

•    Commas are sometimes used at the ends of lines in addresses; full
stops may be used at the ends of addresses; full stops'are used after
abbreviated titles. After the opening salutation, Americans may put a
colon, especially in business letters {Dear Mr. Hawkes:), or a comma.

•    Gentlemen is used instead of Dear Sirs.

•    Dates are written differently (month before day) - see 152.

•    Yours faithfully is not used; common endings are Sincerely,
Sincerely yours or Yours truly, followed by a comma.

•    Americans are often addressed (and sign their names) with the first
name in full, followed by the initial of a middle name {Alan J. Parker).
This is less usual in Britain.

Letters to strangers often begin with an explanation of the reason for
writing. DearX

I am writing to ask...

One does not normally begin a letter to a stranger with an enquiry about
health, (not Dear -X, How are you getting on?)

For more information about names and titles, see 363.

For more information about the use of commas and full stops, see 476,
473.

For more information about paragraphing, see 406.

Examples of letters and envelopes Formal

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

14 Plowden Road

Torquay

Devon

TQ6 IRS

Tel 0742 06538

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

The Secretary Hall School of Design 39 Beaumont Street London W4 4U

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

16 June 2005

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Dear Sir or Madam

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

1 should be grateful if you would send me information about the
regulations for admission to the Hall School of Design. Could you also
tell me whether the School arranges accomodation for students?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Yours faithfully

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Meith* Parker

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Keith Parker

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

The Secretary Hall School of Design 39 Beaumont Street London W4 4U

►

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark71>>i,crndfh'

WIB 6DH 'PhWfOJtoib\^Z\^

i<j Monk-ihmifa n let hrd ami wrikuui. We rftUhf wyeyul ffwnedm.
Biilcutd IwprftotjriMirt\^ihrkoltikigs.Weibaybt it
   umfte-CMmfywrj-utmmr,

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark72>>cttui vvj hHiiitiJurtoHt drftgf efc,

Su.hM'Smt.,1 lupe. Than& oyatH-

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark73>>tm

<<main-9.xhtml#bookmark74>>Ctftfaf' PS Pid I fafum pinrofjuu*i behind in
Mtf {jtdmmt? if So\^ytHthHitym Hwtttsewi'MMH-?

‘\^eiftLiutet Ahh Sha+f>

i4-Wt*?WiMj House-Brihu %nnC Oxprvt OX35JP

<<main-10.xhtml>>

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark0>>147 correspondence (2): emails and text
messages

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark1>>1 formal emails: style and layout

Formal emails are similar in style to letters on paper. The writer's
postal address and phone/fax number, if they are included, follow the
signature.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    informal emails

Personal emails are usually much more informal in style than letters on
paper. Instead of 'Dear X', they often begin for example 'X\ ‘Hi, X\
'Hello, X'; or with no salutation at all.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    addresses

email addresses are read as follows:

[[mailto:j.harris@fimbiz.co.uk][j.harris@fimbiz.co.uk]] ‘j dot harris at
funbiz dot co dot u k' [[mailto:mary@log-farm.com][mary@log-farm.com]]
‘mary at log dash farm dot com'
[[mailto:the_rabbit@coolmail.gr][the\_rabbit@coolmail.gr]] ‘the
underline rabbit at coolmail dot g r*

Note also the names of symbols in ‘urls' (internet addresses):

/ 'forward slash'    \ 'backslash'    : 'colon'

Example of an informal email

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

11 Phil

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark4>>Subject; new address

¥) 110, ifin B I u M

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Arlal

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Hi, Phil

Good to hear from you.

How about 29 or 30 Sept?

I am working like crazy - still a lot to do around the house. Also
signed up for a creative writing course - don't laugh!

Enjoying the village - very interesting world this, but there are times
when they talk a language I don't understand.

New address etc below.

Yours

Robin

63 Baker Lane Carstairs

Yorkshire LS7 3P0 Tel 01466 7902 fax 01466 7964

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

►

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark5>>txt msgs (text messages)

Text messages (sent for example by mobile phone) use a large number of
abbreviations to save time and space. Words are shortened, often by
leaving out vowels. Letters and numbers are used instead of words (or
parts of words) that sound the same. Initial letters only are used for
some common expressions. Some typical examples:

See you later.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

c u I8r

r u cumin 2day? tx 4 a gr8 party just 2 let u no wil u b hr Thu eve?
RUOK* got ur msg wil b @ bbq @ 9 2 bsy atm, tlk I8r ifUv tym, send pix o
kids

need mo infintn

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Are you coming today?

Thanks for a great party.

Just to let you know.

Will you be here Thursday evening? Are you OK?

Got your message.

Will be at barbecue at 9.

Too busy at the moment, talk later.

If you have time, send pictures of kids.

Need more information.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark6>>148 countable and uncountable nouns (1):
basic information

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark7>>1    the difference between countable and
uncountable nouns

Countable nouns are the names of separate objects, people, ideas etc
which can be counted. We can use numbers and the article a/an with
countable nouns; they have plurals.

a cat    a newspaper    three cats    two newspapers

Uncountable (or ‘mass') nouns are the names of materials, liquids,
abstract qualities, collections and other things which we see as masses
without clear boundaries, and not as separate objects. We cannot use
numbers with uncountable nouns, and most are singular with no plurals.
We do not normally use a/an with uncountable nouns, though there are
some exceptions (see 149.4).

water (not a-water, two waters) wool (not a wool, two wools) weather
(not a weather, two weathers)

Some determiners (see 154) can only be used with countable nouns (e.g.
many, few); others can only be used with uncountables (e.g. much,
little). Compare:

How many hours do you work? How much money do you earn?

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark8>>2    problems

Usually it is easy to see whether a noun is countable or uncountable.
Obviously house is normally a countable noun, and sand is not. But it is
not always so clear: compare a journey (countable) and travel
(uncountable); a glass (countable) and glass (uncountable); vegetables
(countable) and fruit (uncountable). The following rules will help, but
to know exactly how a particular noun can be used, it is necessary to
check in a good dictionary.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark9>>3 travel and a journey; a piece of advice

Travel and journey have very similar meanings, but travel is normally
uncountable (it means ‘travelling in general*, and we do not talk about
‘a travel'), while journey is countable (a journey is one particular
movement from one place to another) and can have a plural: journeys.

I like travel, but it's often tiring.    Did you have a good journey?

Often we can make an uncountable word countable by putting ‘a piece of
or a similar expression in front of it.

He never listens to advice.    Can I give you a piece of advice?

Here are some other examples of general/particular pairs. (Note that
some words that are uncountable in English have countable equivalents in
other

languages.)

Uncountable    Countable

accommodation    a place to live (not an accommodation)

baggage    a piece/item of baggage; a case/trunk/bag

bread    a piece/loaf of bread; a loaf; a roll

chess    a game of chess

chewing gum    a piece of chewing gum (not a chewing gum)

equipment    a piece of equipment; a tool etc

furniture    a piece/article of furniture; a table, chair etc

information    a piece of information

knowledge    a fact

lightning    a flash of lightning

luck    a piece/bitlstroke of luck

luggage    a piece/item of luggage; a case/trunk/bag

money    a note; a coin; a sum

news    a piece of news

permission

poetry    a poem

progress    a step forward; an advance

publicity    an advertisement

research    a piece of research; an experiment

rubbish    a piece of rubbish

slang    a slang word/expression

thunder    a clap of thunder

traffic    cars etc

vocabulary    a word/expression '

work    a job; a piece of work

Note that when uncountable English words are borrowed by other
languages, they may change into countable words with different meanings
(for example parking means the activity of parking in general, but
French un parking means ‘a car park*).

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark10>>4 materials: glass, paper etc

Words for materials are uncountable, but we can often use the same word
as a countable noun to refer to something made of the material. Compare:

►

-    I'd like some typing paper.

Vm going out to buy a paper (= a newspaper)

-    The window's made of unbreakable glass.

Would you like a glass of water?

Nouns for materials, liquids etc can be countable when they are used to
talk about different types.

Not all washing powders are kind to your hands.

We have a selection of fine wines at very good prices.

The same thing happens when we talk about ordering drinks. Compare: Have
you got any coffee?

Could I have two coffees? (= cups of coffee)

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark11>>5    fruit, rice, wheat, spaghetti, hair;
vegetables, peas, grapes, oats

Many things (e.g. rice, grapes) can be seen either as a collection of
separate elements or as a mass. Some names for things of this kind are
uncountable, while others are countable (usually plural).

Uncountable: fruit rice, spaghetti, macaroni (and other pasta foods),
sugar, salt, corn, wheat, barley, rye, maize.

Countable: vegetable(s), bean(s)_{t} pea(s), grape(s), oats, lentil(s).

Fruit is very expensive, but vegetables are cheap.

Wheat is used to make bread; oats are used to make porridge.

Is the spaghetti ready?    These grapes are sour.

Hair is normally uncountable in English.

His hair is black.

But one strand of hair is a hair (countable).

So why has he got two blonde hairs on his jacket?

For words that are used to talk about one ‘piece* of uncountable
collections (e.g. a grain of corn, a blade of grass), see 430.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark12>>6    abstract nouns: time, life, experience
etc

Many abstract nouns can have both uncountable and countable uses, often
corresponding to more ‘general^{1} and more ‘particular* meanings.
Compare:

-    Don't hurry - there's plenty of time.

Have a good time.

There are times when I just want to stop work

-    Life is complicated

He's had a really difficult life.

-    She hasn't got enough experience for the job.

I had some strange experiences last week.

-    It's hard to feel pity for people like that.

It's a pity it's raining.

-    Your plan needs more thought

I had some frightening thoughts in the night.

-    I need to practise conversation.

Jane and I had a very interesting conversation.

See 149.2 for more details.

For more about time, see 593; for life, see 324.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark13>>7 illnesses

The names of illnesses are usually singular uncountable in English,
including those ending in -s.

If you've already had measles, you can't get it again.

There's a lot of flu around at the moment The words for some minor
ailments are countable: e.g. a cold, a sore throat, a headache. However,
toothache, earache, stomach-ache and backache are usually uncountable in
British English. In American English, these words are generally
countable if they refer to particular attacks of pain. Compare:

I've got toothache. (BrE)    I have a toothache. (AmE)

For the with measles, flu etc, see 70.14.

For more information on the use of articles with countable and
uncountable nouns, see 65.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark14>>149 countable and uncountable nouns (2):
advanced points

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark15>>1    20 square metres of wall

Singular countable nouns are sometimes used as uncountables (e.g. with
much, enough, plenty of ox a lot of) in order to express the idea of
amount. There's enough paint for 20 square metres ofwalL I've got too
much nose and not enough chin.

If you buy one of these you get plenty of car for your money.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark16>>2    not much difference

Some countable abstract nouns can be used uncountably after little, much
and other determiners. Common examples are difference, point, reason,
idea, change, difficulty, chance and question.

There's not much difference between ‘begin' and ‘start'.

I don't see much point in arguing about it.

We have little reason to expect prices to fall.

I haven't got much idea of her plans.

There isn't any change in his condition.

They experienced little difficulty in stealing the painting.

Do you think we have much chance of catching the train?

There's some question of our getting a new Managing Director.

Note the expression have difficulty (in) .. .ing.

I have difficulty (in) remembering faces. (not I have difficulties ...)

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark17>>3    in all weathers', on your travels

A few uncountable nouns have plural uses in fixed expressions.

He goes running in all weathers.

Did you meet anybody exciting on your travels?

Gulliver's Travels (novel by Jonathan Swift)    ►

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark18>>4    a/an with uncountable nouns

With certain uncountable nouns - especially nouns referring to human
emotions and mental activity - we often use a/an when we are limiting
their meaning in some way.

We need a secretary with a first-class knowledge of German, (not ...
with first-class knowledge of German:)

She has always had a deep distrust of strangers.

That child shows a surprising understanding of adult behaviour.

My parents wanted me to have a good education (not ... to have good
education.)

You've been a great help.

I need a good sleep.

Note that these nouns cannot normally be used in the plural, and that
most uncountable nouns cannot be used with a/an at all, even when they
have an adjective.

My father enjoys very good health. (not ... a very good health.)

We're having terrible weather, (not .. .-a terrible weather.)

He speaks excellent English, (not .. .-an-exeetient English;)

It's interesting work, (not .. .-an interesting work.)

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark19>>5    plural uncountables

Some uncountable nouns are plural. They have no singular forms with the
same meaning, and cannot normally be used with numbers.

Vue bought the groceries. (but not .. . a grocery, or
...-three-groeeries:)

The Dover customs have found a large shipment of cocaine, (but not The
Dover custom has ...)

Many thanks for your help, (but not Much thank...)

For details, see 524.7.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark20>>150 country

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark21>>1    countable use

Country (countable) = 'nation', ‘land'.

Scotland is a cold country.

France is the country I know best.

How many countries are there in Europe?

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark22>>2    uncountable use

Country (uncountable) = 'open land without many buildings'.

I like wild country best.

With this meaning, we cannot say a country or countries.

My parents live in nice country near Belfast, (not ... in a
nice-country...) The expression the country (the opposite of the town)
is very common.

We live in the country just outside Manchester.

Would you rather live in the town or the country?

For information about countable and uncountable nouns, see 148-149.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark23>>151    dare

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark24>>1    uncommon

In modern English, dare is not a very common verb. In an informal style,
people generally use other expressions.

He's not afraid to say what he thinks.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    negative use; daren't

Dare is, however, quite often used in negative sentences. It can be
followed by an infinitive with or without to.

She doesn't dare (to) go out at night.

The old lady didn't dare (to) open the door.

A special negative form daren't (+ infinitive without to) is common in
British English.

I daren't look.

The third person singular is also daren't, without -s.

She daren't tell him what she thinks.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark26>>3    special expressions

Don't you dare! is sometimes used to discourage people from doing
unwanted things.

Mummy, can I draw a picture on the wall?~ Don't you dare!

How dare you? is sometimes used as an indignant exclamation.

How dare you? Take your hands off me at once!

And J dare say (sometimes written J daresay) is used to mean ‘1 think
probably', 'I suppose*.

I dare say it'll rain soon.    I daresay you're ready for a drink.

Children use the expression I dare you + infinitive to challenge each
other to do frightening things.

J dare you to run across the road with your eyes shut.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark27>>152    dates

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark28>>1 writing

In Britain, the commonest way to write the day's date is as follows.
Note that the names of months always begin with capital letters (see
556).

30 March 2004 27 July 2003 The last two letters of the number word are
sometimes added (e.g. 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 6th). Some people write a comma
before the year, but this is no longer very common in Britain except
when the date comes inside a sentence.

30th MarchQ 2004

He was bom in Hawick on 14 December, 1942.

The date may be written entirely in figures.

30/3/04 30-3-04 30.3.04 In the USA it is common to write the month first
and to put a comma before the year.

March 30, 2004    ►

All-figure dates are written differently in Britain and America, since
British people put the day first while Americans generally start with
the month. So for example, 6.4.02 means *6 April 2002' in Britain, but
'June 4, 2002' in the USA. The longer names of the months are often
abbreviated as follows:

Jan Feb Mar Apr Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec The names of decades (e.g. the
nineteen sixties) can be written like this: the 1960s.

For the position of dates in letters, see 146.

For full stops in abbreviations, see 2.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark29>>2    speaking

30 March 1993 = 'March the thirtieth, nineteen ninety-three' (AmE also

'March thirtieth ...') or *the thirtieth of March, nineteen
ninety-three'

1200 = 'twelve hundred'

1305 = 'thirteen hundred and five' or ‘thirteen O (/so/) five*

1498 = 'fourteen (hundred and) ninety-eight^{1} 1910 = 'nineteen
(hundred and) ten*

1946 = 'nineteen (hundred and) forty-six'

2000 = 'two thousand'

2005 = 'two thousand and five'

To announce the date, It's is used.

It's April the first.

To ask about dates, we can say for instance:

What's the date (today)? What date is it?

What date is your birthday?

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark30>>3    BC and AD

To distinguish between dates before and after the birth of Christ, we
use the abbreviations BC (= Before Christ) and AD (= Anno Domini - Latin
for ^{4}in the year of the Lord'). BC follows the date; AD can come
before or after it.

Julius Caesar first came to Britain in 55 BC.

The emperor Trajan was born in AD 53 / 53 AD.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark31>>153 dead, died and death

Dead is an adjective.

a dead man Mrs McGinty is dead.

That idea has been dead for years.

Died is the past tense and past participle of the verb die.

Shakespeare died in 1616. (not Shakespeare dead ...)

She died in a car crash, (not She is dead in ...)

So far 50 people have died in the fighting.

Note the spelling of the present participle dying (see 561).

Death is a noun meaning ‘the end of life*.

After his death his wife went to live in Canada.

For expressions like the dead (= dead people), see 17.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark32>>154 determiners: the, my, some, several etc

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark33>>1    What are determiners?

Determiners are words like the, a, my, this, some, either, every,
enough, several Determiners come at the beginning of noun phrases, but
they are not adjectives.

the moon    this house    every week

a nice day    some problems enough trouble

my fat old cat either arm    several young students

There are two main groups of determiners.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark34>>2    Group A determiners: the, my, this,...

These help to identify things - to say whether they are known or unknown
to the hearer, which one(s) the speaker is talking about, whether the
speaker is thinking of particular examples or speaking in general, etc.
There are three kinds:

articles: a/an, the (see 61-70)

possessives: my, your, his, her, its, our, your, their, one's, whose
(see 441, 626) demonstratives: this_{t} these, that, those (see 589)

We cannot put two Group A determiners together. We can say a friend, my
friend or this friend, but not the my friend, the this friend, this my
friend or my this friend. To put a possessive together with a/an or a
demonstrative, we can use the structure a/this ... of mine/yours etc
(see 443).

She's a friend of mine, (not She's a my friend)

Nouns with possessive *s (see 439-440) can be used like determiners
(e.g. Britain's weather).

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark35>>3    Group B determiners: some, each, much,
enough etc

Most of these are ‘quantifiers': they say how much or how many we are
talking about. The most important are: some, any, no eacht every,
either, neither

much, many, more, most; (a) little, less, least; (a) few, fewer, fewest;
enough;

several all, both, half

what, whatever, which, whichever Some Group B determiners are used with
singular nouns (e.g. each), some with plurals (e.g. many), some with
uncountables (e.g. much), and some with more than one kind of noun (e.g.
which).

We can put two Group B determiners together if the combination makes
sense.

We meet every few days. Have you got any more coffee?

For details of the use of Group B determiners, look up the sections on
particular words.

►

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark36>>4    Group B + Group A: some of the people

Group B determiners can be used directly before nouns, without of Have
you got any sugar? (not ..any-of-sugar;)

Most people agree with me. (not Most-of-people-...)

But if we want to put a Group B determiner before a noun which has a
Group A determiner (article, possessive or demonstrative), we have to
use of. Compare:

-    some people    - enough remarks

some of the people    enough of those remarks

-    which friends    - neither door

which of your friends    neither of these doors

-    each child    - most shops each of my children most of the shops

A Group B determiner + o/can be used directly before a noun in a few
cases. This happens with proper nouns such as place names, and sometimes
with uncountable nouns that refer to the whole of a subject or activity.

Most of Wales was without electricity last night.

Much of philosophy is concerned with questions that have no answers.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark37>>5    Group B + of + pronoun: most of us

Group B determiners are used with of before pronouns.

neither of them    which of us    most of you

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark38>>6    no and none; every and every one

No and every are not used before of, instead we use none and every one.
Compare:

-    no friends    - every blouse

none of my friends    every one of these blouses

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark39>>7    all (of), both (of), half (of)

We can leave out of after all_{t} both and half when they are followed
by nouns (but not when they are followed by pronouns).

all (of) his ideas    half (of) her income

both (of) my parents    but all of us (not all us)

Note that when each, every, either and neither are used directly before
nouns without of the nouns are singular. Compare:

-    each tree    - neither partner

each of the trees    neither of the partners

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark40>>8    Group A + Group B: his many friends

Certain Group B determiners can be used after Group A determiners.

They are many, most, little, least and few.

his many friends these few poems the least time the most money a little
time    a few questions

For the difference between little and a little, and between few and a
few, see 329.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark41>>9    other determiners: other, such, what,
only, numbers

There are a few other determiners that do not fit into Groups A and B.
They are other, such, what (in exclamations), only and numbers. Other,
only and

numbers come after Group A determiners (another is written as one word);
such and what come before the article aJan. my other sister    such a
nice day

the only possibility    the three bears

what a pity

Other and such can also come after some Group B determiners. many other
problems    most such requests

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark42>>10 determiners without nouns; / haven't read
any

Nouns are often dropped after determiners if the meaning is clear.

Do you know OrwelVs books? --- I haven't read any.

Have we got any tomatoes? --- A few.

Which chair do you want?--- This will do.

Determiners are sometimes used without nouns to refer to people in
general. This is formal and generally rather old-fashioned.

Many are called but Jew are chosen. (The Bible)

Some say one thing some say another.

OPEN MEETING: ALL (ARE) WELCOME.

Possessives (except whose and his) have different forms when they are
used without nouns: mine, yours, hers, ours, theirs (see 442). Compare:

That's my coat    That's mine.

Its and one's are not used without nouns. (See 442)

For others meaning * other people', see 54.4. For all meaning
everything, see 38.2.

For expressions like a lot of, a heap of the majority of see 333.

For more information about particular determiners, consult the entries
for the individual words (see Index).

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark43>>155 different

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark44>>1    modifiers: any different etc

Different is a litde like a comparative: unlike most adjectives, it can
be modified by any and no, (a) little and not much.

I hadn't seen her for years, but she wasn't any different.

How's the patient, doctor? ~ No different.

His ideas are little different from those of his friends.

The new school isn't much different from the old one.

Quite different means ‘completely different' (see 489.3).

I thought you'd be like your sister, but you're quite different Unlike
comparatives, different can also be modified by very.

She's very different from her sister.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark45>>2    prepositions: different from/to

From is generally used after different, many British people also use to.
In American English, than is common.

American football is very different from/to soccer.

(AmE ... different frotnJthan soccer.)

Before a clause, different than is also possible in British English.

The job's different than I expected.

(or ... different from/to what I expected.)

For the difference between different and other, see 54.5.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark46>>156    direct speech: reporting verbs and
word order

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    informal spoken reports: said, thought

When we repeat people's words or thoughts, we normally use say or think.
They can go before sentences or at other natural breaks (e.g. between
clauses or after discourse markers).

So I said What are you doing in our bedroom?' Tm sorry', he said, T
thought it was my room* Well, I thought, that's funny, he's got my
handbag open. 7/ that's the case,' I said ‘what are you doing with my
handbag?'

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    literary direct speech: ask, exclaim,
suggest...

In novels, short stories etc, a much wider variety of reporting verbs
are used: for example ask, exclaim, suggest, reply, cry, reflect,
suppose, grunt, snarl, hiss, whisper And reporting verbs are often put
before their subjects (‘inversion' -see 303).

Is this Mr Rochester's houseV asked Emma.

‘Great Heavens!' cried Celia. ‘Is there no end to your wickedness? I
implore you - leave me aloneV ‘Never,' hissed the Duke...

Inversion is not normal with pronoun subjects.

You monsterV she screamed (not ... screamed she.)

In literary writing, reporting expressions often interrupt the normal
flow of the sentences quoted.

%our information,' I replied 'is out of date.'

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark49>>157    discourse markers

Discourse means ‘pieces of language longer than a sentence'. Some words
and expressions are used to show how discourse is constructed. They can
show the connection between what a speaker is saying and what has
already been said or what is going to be said; they can help to make
clear the structure of what is being said; they can indicate what
speakers think about what they are saying or what others have said.
There are a very large number of these ‘discourse markers', and it is
impossible to give a complete list in a few pages. Here are a few of the
most common examples. Some of these words and expressions have more than
one use; for more information, look in a good dictionary. Some discourse
markers are used mostiy in informal speech or writing; others are more
common in a formal style. Note that a discourse marker usually comes at
the beginning of a clause.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark50>>1 focusing and linking

□ with reference to; talking!speaking of!about; regarding, as regards;
as far as... is concerned; as for

These expressions focus attention on what is going to be said, by
announcing the subject in advance. Some of them also make a link with
previous discourse, by referring back to what was said before.

With reference to is a very formal expression used mainly at the
beginning of business letters.

With reference to your letter of 17 March, I am pleased to inform you
...

Speaking! talking of!about... is used to make a link with what has just
been said. It can help a speaker to change the subject.

I saw Max and Lucy today. You know, she Talking of Max, did you know
he's going to Australia?

Regarding can come at the beginning of a piece of discourse.

Hello, John. Now look, regarding those sales figures -1 really don't
think... As regards and as far as... is concerned usually announce a
change of subject by the speaker/writer.

... there are no problems about production. Now as regards marketing...

... about production. As far as marketing is concerned, I think...

People sometimes leave out is concerned after as far as ... This is
usually considered incorrect.

As far as the new development plan, I think we ought to be very careful
/4s for often suggests lack of interest or dislike.

Vve invited Andy and Bob. As far Stephen, I never want to see him again.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark51>>2    balancing contrasting points

□    on the one hand (formal), on the other hand; while; whereas

These expressions are used to balance two facts or ideas that contrast,
but do not contradict each other.

Arranged marriages are common in many Middle Eastern countries. In the
West, on the other hand, they are unusual On the one hand we need to
reduce costs. On the other hand investment... I like the mountains,
while/whereas my wife prefers the seaside.

While and whereas can be put before the first of the contrasting points.
While/Whereas some languages have 30 or more different vowel sounds,
others have five or less.

For a comparison of on the other hand and on the contrary, see 144.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark52>>3    emphasising a contrast

□    however, nevertheless; nonetheless; mind you; still; yet, in spite
of this! that, despite this! that

However, nevertheless and nonetheless emphasise the fact that the second
point contrasts with the first. Nevertheless is very formal.

Britain came last in the World Children's Games. However, we did have
one success, with Annie Smith's world record in the sack race.

It was an oppressive dictatorship, but nevertheless it ensured
stability. Mind you (less formal) and still introduce the contrasting
point as an afterthought.

I don't like the Job much. Mind you / Still, the money's OK.

Yet, still, in spite of this! that and despite this! that (more formal)
can be used to suggest that something is surprising, in view of what was
said before.

He says he's a socialist, and yet he owns three houses and drives a
Rolls. The train was an hour late. In spite of this, I managed to get to
the meeting in time, (ok ... / still managed to get...)    ►

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark53>>4    similarity

□    similarly, in the same way; just as

These are most common in a formal style.

The roads are usually very crowded at the beginning of the holiday
season. Similarly, there are often serious traffic jams at the end of
the holidays.

James Carter did everything he could to educate his children. In the
same way, they in turn put a high value on their own children's
education.

Just as the Greeks looked down on the Romans, the Romans looked down on
their uncivilised neighbours.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark54>>5    concession and counterargument

□    concession: it is true; certainly; of course; granted; if; may;
stressed auxiliaries.

□    counter-argument: however; even so; but; nevertheless; nonetheless;
all the same; still

These expressions are used in a three-part structure: (1) there is
discussion of facts that point in a certain direction; (2) it is agreed
(the concession) that a particular contradictory fact points the other
way; (3) but the speaker/writer dismisses this and returns to the
original direction of argument.

... cannot agree with colonialism. It is true that the British may have
done some good in India. Even so, colonialism is basically evil.

... incapable of lasting relationships with women. Certainty, several
women loved him, and he was married twice. All the same, the women
closest to him were invariably deeply unhappy.

Very few people understood Einstein's theory. Of course, everybody had
heard of him, and a fair number of people knew the word ‘relativity\ But
hardly anybody could tell you what he had actually said.

Vm not impressed by her work Granted, she writes like an angel. But she
doesn't write about anything of any interest.

It was a successful party. The Scottish cousins, if a little surprised
by the family's behaviour, were nonetheless impressed by the friendly
welcome they received.

I'm glad to have a place of my own. It's true it's a bit small, and it's
a long way from the centre, and it does need a lot of repairs done.
Still, it's home.

For other uses of still, see 566.    For other uses of of course, see
390.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark55>>6    contradicting

□    on the contrary, quite the opposite

These expressions can contradict a suggestion made by another speaker.

Interesting lecture?--- On the contrary / Quite the opposite, it was a
complete waste of time.

They can also be used when a speaker/writer strengthens a negative
statement which he/she has just made.

She did not allow the accident to discourage her. On the contrary /
Quite the opposite, she began to work twice as hard.

For a comparison of on the contrary and on the other hand, see 144.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark56>>7    dismissal of previous discourse

□    at least; anyway; anyhow; at any rate; in any case

At least can suggest that one thing is certain or all right, even if
everything else is unsatisfactory.

The car's completely smashed up-I don't know what we're going to do.

At least nobody was hurt.

The other four expressions are used (mostly informally) to mean ‘What
was said before doesn't matter - the main point is as follows^{1}.

I'm not sure what time I'll arrive, maybe seven or eight Anyway / Anyhow
/ At any rate I In any case, I'll certainly be there before eight
thirty.

Note that anyway is not the same as in any way, which means ‘by any
method'.

Can I help you in any way?

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark57>>8    change of subject

□    by the way, incidentally right; all right, nour, OK

By the way and incidentally are used to introduce something one has just
thought of that is not directly part of the conversation.

I was talking to Phil yesterday. Oh, by the way, he sends you his
regards. Well, he thinks...

Janet wants to talk to you about advertising. Incidentally, she's lost a
lot of weight. Anyway, it seems the budget...

These two expressions are sometimes used to change the subject
completely. Freddy's had another crash. ~ Oh, yes? Poor old chap. By the
way, have you heard from Joan recently?

Lovely sunset ---Yes, isn't it? Oh, incidentally, what happened to that
bike I lent you?

(All) right, now and OK are often used informally by teachers, lecturers
and people giving instructions, to indicate that a new section of the
discourse is starting.

Any questions? Right, lefs have a word about tomorrow's arrangements.
Now, I'd like to say something about the exam ...

Is that all clear? OK, now has anybody ever wondered why it's impossible
to tickle yourself? ...

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark58>>9    return to previous subject

□    to return to the previous point (formal); as I was saying
(informal)

These expressions are used to return to an earlier subject after an
interruption or a brief change of subject.

... especially in France. To return to the previous point, non-European
historians...

...on the roof-Jeremy, put the cat down, please. As I was saying, ifJack
gets up on the roof and looks at the tiles...

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark59>>10 structuring

□    first(ly), first of all, second(ly), third(ly) etc; lastly,
finally, to begin with; to start with; in the first/second/third place,
for one thing (informal); for another thing (informal)    ►

We use these to show the structure of what we are saying.

First (ly), we need somewhere to live. Secondly), we need to find work.
There are three reasons why I don't want to dance with you. To start
with, my feet hurt. For another thing, you can't dance. And lastly,...

Firstly, secondly etc are more formal than first, second etc.

For at first, see 84. For at last, see 204.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark60>>11    adding

□    moreover (very formal); furthermore (formal); in addition; as well
as that, on top of that (informal); another thing is (informal); what is
more; also; besides; in any case

These expressions introduce additional information or arguments.

The Prime Minister is unwilling to admit that he can ever be mistaken.

Moreover, he is totally incapable ...

The peasants are desperately short of food. Furthermore / In addition,
they urgently need doctors and medical supplies.

She borrowed my bike and never gave it back. And as well as that / on
top of that / what is more, she broke the lawnmower and then pretended
she hadn't.

If Janet and Pete come and stay, where's Mary going to sleep? Another
thing is, we can't go away next weekend if they're here.

Her father was out of work. Also, her mother was in poor health.

Besides and in any case can add an extra, more conclusive fact or
argument. What are you trying to get a job as a secretary for? You'd
never manage to work eight hours a day. Besides I In any case; you can't
type.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark61>>12    generalising

n on the whole; in general; in all! most! many I some cases; broadly
speaking, by and large; to a great extent, to some extent, apart
from...; except for....

These expressions say how far the speaker/writer thinks a generalisation
is true.

On the whole, I had a happy childhood.

In general we are satisfied with the work.

In most cases, people will be nice to you if you are nice to them.

Broadly speaking, teachers are overworked and underpaid By and large,
this is a pleasant place to live.

To a great extent, a person's character is formed by the age of eight.

Apart from and except for (see 102) introduce exceptions to
generalisations. Apart from the soup, I thought the meal was excellent.

Except for Sally, they all seemed pretty sensible.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark62>>13    giving examples

□    for instance; for example; e.g.; in particular

These expressions introduce particular examples to illustrate what has
been said.

People often behave strangely when they're abroad Take Mrs Ellis, for
example / for instance,...

In writing, the abbreviation e.g. (Latin exempli gratia), pronounced /i:
'd3i:/, is often used to mean ‘for example'.

Some common minerals, e.g. silica or olivine,...

In particular focuses on a special example.

We are not at all happy with the work you did on the new kitchen. In
particular, we consider that the quality of wood used...

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark63>>14    logical consequence

□    therefore (formal); as a result (formal); consequently (formal);
so; then

These expressions show that what is said follows logically from what was
said before.

She was therefore unable to avoid an unwelcome marriage.

So she had to get married to a man she didn't like.

The last bus has gone. --- Then we're going to have to walk.

Therefore is used in logical, mathematical and scientific proofs.

Therefore 2x - 15 = 17y + 6.

So is often used as a general-purpose connector, rather like and, in
speech. So anyway, this man came up to me and said 'Have you got a
light?'

So I told him no_{t} I hadn't So he looked at me and...

For the difference between so and then, see 537.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark64>>15    making things clear; giving details

□    I mean; actually; that is to say; in other words

We use I mean (see 348) when we make things clearer or give more
details.

It was a terrible evening. I mean, they all sat round and talked
politics. Actually (see 11) can introduce details, especially when these
are unexpected.

Tommy's really stupid. He actually still believes in Father Christmas.

That is to say and in other words are used when the speaker/writer says
something again in another way.

We cannot continue with the deal on this basis. That is to say / In
other words, unless you can bring down the price we shall have to cancel
the order.

<<main-10.xhtml#bookmark65>>16    softening and correcting

□    I think; I feel; I reckon (informal); I guess (informal); in my
view/opinion (formal); apparently; so to speak; more or less; sort of
(informal); kind of (informal); well; really; that is to say; at least,
I'm afraid; I suppose; or rather, actually; I mean

I think/feelf reckon!guess and in my view!opinion are used to make
opinions and statements sound less dogmatic - they suggest that the
speaker is just giving a personal opinion, with which other people may
disagree.

/ think you ought to try again.

I really feel she's making a mistake.

I reckon/guess she just doesn't respect you, Bill

In my view/opinion, it would be better to wait until July.

Apparently can be used to say that the speaker has got his/her
information from somebody else (and perhaps does not guarantee that it
is true).

Have you heard? Apparently Susie's pregnant again.    ►

So to speak, more or less and sort! kind of (see 551) are used to show
that one is not speaking very exactly, or to soften something which
might upset other people. Well and really can also be used to soften.

I sort of think we ought to start going home, perhaps, realty.

I kind of think it's more or less a crime.

Do you like it? \^ Well, yes, it's all right.

That is to say and at least can be used to 'back down' from something
too strong or definite that one has said.

I'm not working for you again. Well, that's to say, not unless you put
my wages up.

Ghosts don't exist. At least, I've never seen one.

I'm afraid (see 28.2) is apologetic: it can introduce a polite refusal,
or bad news.

Vm afraid I can't help you. Vm afraid I forgot to buy the stamps.

I suppose can be used to enquire politely about something (respectfully
inviting an affirmative answer).

I suppose you're very busy just at the moment?

It can also be used to suggest unwilling agreement.

Can you help me for a minute? ~ I suppose so.

Actually (see 11) can correct misunderstandings.

Hello, John. ~ Actually, my name's Andy.

Well can soften corrections, suggesting ‘That's nearly right'.

You live in Oxford, don't you?~ Well, near Oxford.

Or rather is used to correct oneself.

I'm seeing him in May - or rather early June.

I mean (see 348) can be used to correct oneself or to soften.

Let's meet next Monday -1 mean Tuesday.

She's not very nice. I mean, I know some people like her, but...

<<main-11.xhtml>>

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark0>>17    gaining time

□    let me see, let's see, well; you know; I don't know; I mean; kind
ofi sort of

Expressions of this kind (often called ‘fillers') give the speaker time
to think. How much are you selling it for? Well, let me see...

Why did you do that?~ Oh, well, you know, I don't know, really, I mean,
it just sort of seemed a good idea.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark1>>18    showing one's attitude to what one is
saying

□    honestly; frankly; no doubt

Honestly can be used to claim that one is speaking sincerely.

Honestly, I never said a word to him about the money.

Both honestly and frankly can introduce critical remarks.

Honestly, John, why do you have to be so rude?

What do you think of my hair? ~ Frankly, dear, it's a disaster.

No doubt (see 377) suggests that the speaker/writer thinks something is
probable, but does not know for certain himself/herself.

No doubt the Romans enjoyed telling jokes, just like us.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark2>>19    persuading

□    after all; look look here

After all (see 31) suggests 'this is a strong argument that you haven't
taken into consideration'. Look is more strongly persuasive.

I think we should let her go on holiday alone. After all_{t} she is
fifteen - she's not a child any more.

You can't go there tomorrow. Look, the trains aren't running.;

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark3>>Look here is an angry exclamation meaning
‘You can't say/do that!'

Look here! What are you doing with my suitcase?

No doubt can be used to persuade people politely to do things.

No doubt you'll be paying your rent soon?

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark4>>20    referring to the other person's
expectations

□    actually (especially BrE); in fact, as a matter of fact, to tell
the truth; well

These expressions are used when we show whether somebody's expectations
have been fulfilled or not. Actually (see 11) can be used to say that
somebody ‘guessed right'.

Did you enjoy your holiday? ~ Very much, actually.

Actually, in fact and as a matter of fact can introduce additional
surprising or unexpected information.

The weather was awful Actually, the campsite got flooded and we had to
come home.

Was the concert nice?* Yes, as a matter of fact it was terrific.

Did you meet the Minister?* Yes_{t} In fact, he asked us to lunch.

Actually, in fact, as a matter of fact and to tell the truth can be used
to say that the hearer's expectations were not fulfilled.

How was the holiday?* Well, actually, we didn't go.

Where are the carrots?* Well, in fact I to tell the truth, I forgot to
buy them. I hope you passed the exam.* No, as a matter of fact, I didn't
After a new subject has been announced, well can suggest that something
new or surprising is going to be said about it.

What did you think of her boyfriend? * Well, I was a bit surprised...

You know that new house? Well, you'll never guess who's bought it.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark5>>21    summing up

□    in conclusion; to sum up; briefly; in short

These expressions are most common in a formal style.

... In conclusion, then, we can see that Britain's economic problems
were mainly due to lack of industrial investment To sum up: most of the
committee members supported the idea but a few were against it

He's lossy, he's ignorant and he's stupid. In short, he's useless.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark6>>158    do (1): introduction

Do has three main uses.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark7>>1    auxiliary verb

The auxiliary do is used to form the questions and negatives of other
verbs, as well as emphatic and shortened forms. For details, see 159.

Did you remember to post my letters?

This doesn't taste very nice.    I do like your earrings.

John eats too much. - He certainly does.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark8>>2    general-purpose verb

Do is also an ordinary (non-auxiliary) verb. It can refer to almost any
kind of activity, and is used when it is not necessary or not possible
to be more precise. For details, and the difference between do and make,
see 160.

What are you doing?    Don't just stand there. Do something.

I've finished the phone calls, and Til do the letters tomorrow.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark9>>3    substitute verb

In British English, do can be used alone as a substitute for a main verb
after an auxiliary. For details, see 161.

Do you think Phil will come?He might do. (AmE He might.)

Do so/it/that can be used as a substitute expression when we want to
avoid repeating another verb and what follows. For details, see 162.

I need to take a rest, and I shall do so as soon as I can find time.

He told me to open the door. I did it as quietly as I could.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark10>>4    combined forms

Auxiliary do and non-auxiliary do can occur together.

Do you do much gardening?    How do you do?

The company didn't do very well last year.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark11>>159    do (2): auxiliary verb

The auxiliary verb do is followed by infinitives without to. It has
several uses.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark12>>1 questions

We use do to make questions with ordinary verbs, but not with other
auxiliary verbs (see 480). Compare:

Do you like football? (not bike you-feotbati?)

Can you play football? (not Do you can play football?)

The auxiliary do can make questions with the ordinary verb do.

What do you do in the evenings?

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    negatives

We use do to make negative clauses with ordinary verbs (including the
ordinary verb do), but not with other auxiliary verbs (see 367).

I don't like football (not 1-like'not-football)

Don't go.    I don't do much in the evenings.

but I can't play football (not I don't can play football)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark14>>3    emphasis

We can use do in an affirmative clause for emphasis (see 184).

Do sit down. You do look nice today!

She thinks I don't love her, but I do love her.

I don't do much sport now, but I did play football when I was younger.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark15>>4    inversion

Do is used in some inversion (verb before subject) structures (see 302).

At no time did he lose his self control

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark16>>5    ellipsis

In cases where an auxiliary is used instead of a whole verb phrase (see
181), do is common in affirmative clauses as well as questions and
negatives.

She doesn't like dancing, but I do. (= ... but I like dancing.)

You saw Alan, didn't you?

That meat smells funny. ~ Yes, it does, doesn't it?

Ann thinks there's something wrong with Bill, and so do I.

For do with be, see 90.

For weak pronunciations of do and does, see 616.

For do in short answers, see 517.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark17>>160 do (3): general-purpose verb; do and
make

The general-purpose verb do has several uses, and can sometimes be
confused with make.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark18>>1    do for indefinite activities

We use do when we do not say exactly what activity we are talking about
- for example with words like thing, something, nothing, anything, what.

Then he did a very strange thing, (not Then he made a very strange
thing.) Do something!

I like doing nothing, (not ... making nothing.)

What shall we do?

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark19>>2    do for work

We use do when we talk about work and jobs.

I'm not going to do any work today. Could you do the shopping for me?
It's time to do the accounts.    I wouldn't like to do your job.

I did (= studied) French and German at school.

Has Ben done his homework?

Could you do the ironing first, and then do the windows if you've got
time?

►

3    do .. ./ng

We use do in the informal structure do.. .ing, to talk about activities
that take a certain time, or are repeated (for example jobs and
hobbies). There is usually a determiner (e.g. the, my, some, much)
before the -ing form.

During the holidays Vm going to do some walking and a lot of re£iding.
Let your fingers do the walking. (advertisement for telephone shopping)
Note that the verb after do cannot have an object in this structure.

Vm going to watch some TV. (not I'm going to do some watching TV.)

But do can be used with a compound noun that includes verb + object.

I want to do some bird-watching this weekend.

It's time I did some letter-writing.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark20>>4    make for constructing, creating etc

We often use make to talk about constructing, building, creating etc.

Vve just made a cake.    Let's make a plan.

My father and I once made a boat.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark21>>5    do instead of make

We sometimes use do in place of make, to sound casual about a creative
activity - as if we are not claiming to produce any very special
results.

What shall we eat?* Well, I could do an omelette.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark22>>6    common fixed expressions

do good, harm, business, one's best, a favour, sport, exercise, one's
hair, one's teeth, one's duty, 50 mph

make a journey, an offer, arrangements, a suggestion, a decision, an
attempt, an effort, an excuse, an exception, a mistake, a noise, a phone
call, money, a profit, a fortune, love, peace, war, a bed, a fire,
progress Note that we say make a bed, but we often talk about doing the
bed(s) as part of housework. Compare:

He's old enough to make his own bed now.

I'll start on the vegetables as soon as I've done the beds.

We use take, not make, in take a photo, and have, not make, in have an
(interesting) experience.

For information about sentence structures with make, see 335.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark23>>161 do (4): substitute verb

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark24>>auxiliary verb + do

In British English (but not American), do can be used alone as a
substitute verb after an auxiliary verb.

Come and stay with us. *I may (do), if I have the time. (AmE / may,
if...

or I may come, if...)

He's supposed to have locked the safe.*He has (done). (AmE He has. or He
has locked it.)

I found myself thinking of her as I had never done before.

He didn't pass his exam, but he could have (done) if he'd tried harder.

He smokes more than he used to (do).

Progressive forms are possible, but not very common.

You should be getting dressed. ~ I am (doing).

Note that the auxiliary verb is stressed in this structure.

Close the door, ~ I have done, (not .. .1 have DONE.)

For auxiliary verbs used instead of complete verb phrases, see 181.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark25>>162 do so/it/that

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark26>>1    do so

The expression do so can be used to avoid repeating a verb and its
object or complement. It is usually rather formal.

Put the car away, please.*Vve already done so.

Eventually she divorced Stephen. It was a pity she had not done so
earlier. He told me to get out, and I did so as quietly as possible.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark27>>2    do so and do it/that

Do it and do that can be used instead of do so.

I promised to get the tickets, and I will do sofit as soon as possible.

She rode a camel: she had never done so/that before.

We use do so mainly to refer to the same action, with the same subject,
that was mentioned before. In other cases we prefer do it/that or do
alone.

I haven't got time to get the tickets. Who's going to do it? (not ...-
Who\^s going to do so?)

I rode a camel in Morocco.*I'd love to do that, (not ... to do so.)

I always eat peas with honey. My wife never does. (not ..
.-My-wifeneverdoes

SO:)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark28>>3    do so/it/that, deliberate actions

Do so/it/that are mainly used to refer to deliberate dynamic actions. We
do not usually use these expressions to replace verbs like fall, lose,
like, remember, think, own, which refer to involuntary actions or
states.

I like the saxophone, and I always have (done).

(not ... tmd-I-have-always-doneso/it/tkat:)

She lost her money. I wasn't surprised that she did (not ... that she
didso/itfthat.)

I think Jake's wrong. I did when he first spoke to me.

(not ... I did so/it/that when ...)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark29>>4    other verbs

Note that so, it and that are not normally used in this way after
auxiliary verbs. It is not possible in standard English to say I can so,
She was it or I have that.

For so / am, so it is etc, see 541.2.

For so do I_{t} so am I etc, see 541.1.

For so with say and tell, see 540.

For so with think, believe, hope and similar verbs, see 539.

For auxiliary do as substitute for a whole verb phrase, see 181.

For differences between it and that, see 590.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark30>>163    doubt

Clauses after the verb doubt can be introduced by whether, if or that.
Economists doubt whether interest rates will fall in the near future.

I doubt if shell come this evening.

The directors doubt that new machinery is really necessary.

In an informal style, people sometimes use no conjunction.

I doubt well have enough money for a holiday.

After negative forms of doubt, we normally use that or no conjunction.

I don't doubt (that) there will be more problems.

For no doubt meaning ‘probably', see 377.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark31>>164    dress

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark32>>1    noun

The countable noun dress means an article of women's clothing (it goes
from the shoulders to below the hips).

This is the first time I^{f}ve seen you wearing a dress.

There is also an uncountable noun dress (not used with the article
a/an). It means 'clothing', ‘clothes'. It is not very common in modem
English, and is used mostly to talk about special kinds of clothing (for
example national dress, evening dress, battledress).

He looks good in evening dress, (not ... in an evening dress.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark33>>2    verb: putting clothes on

The verb dress can be used to talk about putting clothes on oneself or
somebody else. Undress is used for taking clothes off.

It only takes me five minutes to dress in the morning.

Could you dress the children for me?

Vm going to undress in front of the fire.

In informal English, we use get dressed/undressed to talk about dressing
or undressing oneself.

Get dressed and come downstairs at once!

Put on and take off are generally used when clothes are mentioned.

I put on a sweater, but it was so warm that I had to take it off again.

Can you take John's boots off for him?

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark34>>3    verb: wearing clothes

To say what somebody is/was wearing on a particular occasion, we can use
the form be dressed in (note the preposition).

I didn't recognise him because he was dressed in a dark suit.

(not ... dressed with... or .. . dressing-in-...)

She was dressed in orange pyjamas.

Be wearing and have on (especially AmE) are also very common.

She was wearing orange pyjamas.

She had on orange pajamas. (AmE)

The active form dress (in) can be used to give the idea of repetition or
habit.

She always dresses in green.    He dresses well.

Note also the expression well dressed.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark35>>165    drown

Both active and passive forms of drown are common when we talk about
accidental drowning.

He (was) drowned while trying to swim across a river.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark36>>166    due to and owing to

Due to and owing to are similar to ‘because of. Due to is more common
than owing to.

Phrases beginning due/owing to are often separated from the rest of
their sentence by a comma.

Due/Owing to the bad weather{,) the match was cancelled We have had to
postpone the meeting) due/owing to the strike.

Some people believe it is incorrect to use due to at the beginning of a
clause in this way, but the structure is common in educated usage.

Due to can also follow the verb be. Owing to is not usually used like
this.

His success was due to his mother. (not ... was owing to his mother.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark37>>167    during and for

During is used to say when something happens; for is used to say how
long it lasts. Compare:

-    My father was in hospital during the summer.

My father was in hospital for six weeks. (not ... during six weeks:)

-    It rained during the night for two or three hours.

YU call in and see you for a few minutes during the afternoon.

For during and in, see 168.

For for, since, in and from, see 208.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark38>>168    during and in

We use both during and in to say that something happens inside a
particular period of time.

Well be on holiday during/in August. I woke up duringfin the night. We
use during to stress that we are talking about the whole of the period.
The shop's closed during the whole of August, (not ... in the whole of
August.)

And we use during when we are talking about an event, activity or
experience (not a period of time).

He had some strange experiences during his military service, (not ..
.-m-his military service.)

77/ try to phone you during the meeting, (not ... in the meeting.)

I met them during my stay in China

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark39>>169 each

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark40>>1    each + singular

Each is a determiner (see 154). We use it before a singular noun.

I enjoy each moment, (not ... each-mements:)

A following verb is also singular.

Each new day is different, (not ... are different)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark41>>2    each of

We use each of before a plural pronoun, or before a determiner (for
example the, my, these-see 154) with a plural noun.

Each of us sees the world differently.

I write to each of my children once a week.

A following verb is normally singular.

Each of them has problems.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark42>>3    pronouns

When a pronoun or possessive is used later in a clause to refer back to
each (of) + noun/pronoun, the later word can be singular (more formal)
or plural (less formal).

Each girl wore what she liked best, (more formal)

Each student wore what they liked best (less formal)

Each of them explained it in his/her/their own way.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark43>>4    position with object

Each can follow an object (direct or indirect), but does not normally
come at the end of a clause.

She kissed them each on the forehead, (but not She kissed them eaeh.)

I want them each to make their own decision.

I sent the secretaries each a Christmas card.

However, each can come at the end of a clause in expressions referring
to amounts and quantities.

They cost £3.50 each.    I bought the girls two ice-creams each.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark44>>5    without a noun

We can drop a noun after each, if the meaning is clear. However, each
one or each of them is more common in an informal style.

Vve got five brothers, and each (one/of them) is different

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark45>>6    with the verb

When each refers to the subject, it can also go with a verb in
mid-position, like some adverbs (for details of word order, see 24). In
this case plural nouns, pronouns and verbs are used.

They have each been told.

We can each apply for our own membership card.

You are each right in a different way.

The plans each have certain advantages and disadvantages.

For the difference between each and every, see 170.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark46>>170    each and every: the difference

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    each with two or more; every with three
or more

Each and every are both normally used with singular nouns. Each can be
used to talk about two or more people or things; every is normally used
to talk, about three or more.

The business makes less money each/every year, (not ..
.-eachlevery-years;) She had a child holding on to each hand. (not .. .
every hand)

For expressions like every two years, every three steps, see 532.8.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    meaning

Each and every can often be used without much difference of meaning.

You look more beautiful eachievery time I see you.

But we prefer each when we are thinking of people or things separately,
one at a time. And every is more common when we are thinking of people
or things together, in a group. (Every is closer to ali) So we are more
likely to say: Each person in turn went to see the doctor. but

Every patient came from the same small village.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark49>>3    structures

We do not use each with words and expressions like almost, practically,
nearly or without exception, which stress the idea of a whole group.

She's lost nearly every friend she had (not .. .■ nearty-each friend...)

Each can be used in some structures where every is impossible.

They each said what they thought (but not They every-,..)

Each of them spoke for five minutes, (but not Every of them ...)

For more details, see 169 {each) and 193 {every).

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark50>>171    each other and one another

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark51>>1    no difference

Each other and one another mean the same.

Ann and I write to each other / one another every week.

Each other is more common than one another, especially in an informal
style.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark52>>2    not used as subject

Each other and one another are not normally used as subjects (though
this occasionally happens in subordinate clauses in very informal
speech).

They each listened carefully to what the other said. (not usually They
listened carefully to what each other said)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark53>>3    each other's / one another's

Both expressions have possessive forms.

They'll sit for hours looking into each other's / one another's eyes
   »

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark54>>4    -selves and each other/one another

Note the difference between -selves and each other / one another.
Compare: John and Mary are strange: they talk to themselves a lot. (John
talks to John;

Mary talks to Mary.)

Susan and Peter talk to each other on the phone every day. (Susan talks
to Peter; Peter talks to Susan.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark55>>5    words used without each other / one
another

We do not normally use each other / one another after words like meet or
marry, where the verb itself makes the meaning clear.

They met in 1992 and married in 1994.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark56>>172 east and eastern, north and northern etc

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark57>>1    adjectives: the difference

We often prefer eastern, northern etc when we are talking about vague,
indefinite or larger areas, and east, north etc for more clearly defined
places (e.g. the names of countries or states). Compare:

-    the northern part of the country    - southern Africa (an area) the
north side of the house South Africa (a country)

-    the southern counties of Britain    - the northern United States
the south coast North Carolina

However, place names do not always follow this rule. Note the following:
Northern Ireland North/East/West Africa North/South America East/South
etc Asia but: Western/Eastern etc Europe South Australia but: Western
Australia; the Northern Territory the North/South AtlantidPacific the
Northern/Southern hemisphere

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark58>>2    'belonging to'

We use eastern, northern etc to mean ‘belonging to' or ‘typical of. a
southern accent    a group of northern poets

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark59>>3    capital letters

Capital letters are used at the beginning of East, Eastern, North,
Northern etc when these come in official or well-established place
names.

North Carolina    Western Australia    the Far East

unemployment in the North (place name meaning ‘the North of England') In
other cases, adjectives, nouns and adverbs begin with small letters.

We spent the winter in southern California.

I live in north London.    There's a strong north wind.

The sun rises in the east    By sunrise we were driving south.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark60>>4    prepositions

Note the difference between in the east etc of... and to the east etc
of...

I live in the east of Scotland.

Denmark is about 500 km to the east of Scotland.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark61>>173    efficient and effective

If somebody/something is efficient, he/she/it works in a well-organised
way without wasting time or energy.

He's not very efficient: he keeps filing letters in the wrong place, he
works very slowly, and he keeps forgetting things.

The postal service is even less efficient than the telephone system.

If something is effective, it has the right effect: it solves a problem
or gets a result.

My headache's much better. Those tablets really are effective.

I think a wide black belt would look very effective with that dress.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark62>>174    either: determiner

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark63>>1    either + singular

We use either with a singular noun to mean ‘one or the other' of two.

Come on Tuesday or Thursday. Either day is OK (not Either days...)

She didn't get on with either parent (not ... either parents)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark64>>2    either of

We use either of before a determiner (for example the, my, these - see
154) or a pronoun. A following noun is plural.

You can use either of the bathrooms.

I don't like either of my maths teachers.

I don't like either of them.

A verb after either of is more often singular, but it can sometimes be
plural in an informal style.

Either of the children is perfectly capable of looking after the baby.

She just doesn't care what either of her parents say(s).

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark65>>3    without a noun

We can use either alone if the meaning is clear.

Would you like tea or coffee?* I don't mind. Either.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark66>>4    pronouns

When a pronoun is used later in a clause to refer back to either + noun/
pronoun, the later pronoun can be singular (more formal) or plural (more
informal).

If either of the boys phones, tell him/them Til be in this evening.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark67>>5    either side/end

In these expressions, either sometimes means ‘each'.

There are roses on either side of the door.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark68>>6    pronunciation

Either is pronounced /'ai6a(r)/ or /'i:53(r)/ (in American English
usually /'irdar/).

For either... or, see 175.

For not... either, neither and nor, see 374.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark69>>175    either... or

We use either... or to talk about a choice between two possibilities
(and sometimes more than two).

I don't speak either French or German.

You can either come with me now or walk home.

If you want ice-cream there's either raspberry, lemon or vanilla We
often balance this structure, so that the same kind of words or
expressions follow either and or.

You can have either tea or coffee, (nouns)

He's either in London or in New York, (prepositional expressions)

Either you'll leave this house or I'll call the police. (clauses)

However, unbalanced sentences with either... or are common. Some people
prefer to avoid them.

You can either have tea or coffee.

He's either in London or New York.

You'll either leave this house or I'll call the police.

For either as a determiner, see 174.

For pronunciation, see 174.5.

For not... either, neither and nor, see 374.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark70>>176    elder and eldest

Elder and eldest can be used instead of older and oldest to talk about
the order of birth of the members of a family. They are only used
attributively (before nouns). Compare:

-    My elder/older brother has just got married

He's three years older than me. (not ... elder-than me.)

-    His eldest/oldest daughter is a medical student.

She's the oldest student in her year.

Elder brother/sister are used when a person has only one brother/sister
who is older; eldest is used when there are more. An elder son/daughter
is the older of two; an eldest son/daughter is the oldest of two or
more.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark71>>177    ellipsis (1): introduction

We often leave out words to avoid repetition, or in other cases when the
meaning can be understood without them. This is called ‘ellipsis'.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark72>>1 replies

In replies we usually avoid repeating information that has just been
given. What time are you coming?* About ten, (More natural than I'm
coming about ten.)

Who said that?* John. (More natural than John said that.)

How many chairs do you need?* Three. (More natural than I need three
chairs.)

She's out this evening?* Yes, working. (More natural than Yes, she's
working this evening.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark73>>2    structures with and, but and or

Repeated words are often dropped in co-ordinate structures (see 178). a
knife and fork (- a knife and a fork)

She was poor but honest (= ... but she was honest.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark74>>3    at the beginning of a sentence

In informal speech, unstressed words are often dropped at the beginning
of a sentence, if the meaning is clear. For details, see 179.

Seen Lucy? (= Have you seen Lucy?)

Doesn't know what she's talking about (= She doesn't...)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark75>>4    at the end of a noun phrase

It is sometimes possible to drop nouns after adjectives, noun modifiers
and/or determiners. For details, see 180.

Do you want large eggs?*No, I'll have small (= ... small eggs.)

My car isn't working. I'll have to use Mary's. (= ... Mary's car.)

We're going to hear the London Philharmonic tonight (=... the London
Philharmonic Orchestra.)

Which shoes are you going to wear?* These. (= These shoes.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark76>>5    at the end of a verb phrase

Auxiliary verbs are often used alone instead of full verbs. For details,
see 181. I haven't paid.*I haven*t either. (= ... I haven't paid
either.)

She said shed phone, but she didn't (= ... didn't phone.)

This type of ellipsis can include words that follow the verb phrase.

I was planning to go to Paris next week, but I can't (= ... I can't go
to Paris next week.)

The same structures are possible with non-auxiliary be and have.

I thought she would be angry, and she was.

He says he hasn't any friends, but I know he has.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark77>>6    infinitives

We can use to instead of repeating a whole infinitive. For details, see
182.

Are you and Gillian getting married?* We hope to.

(= We hope to get married.)

I don't dance much now, but I used to a lot.

Sometimes a whole infinitive, including to, is left out.

Come when you want (= ... when you want to come.)

Have a good time.*I'll try. (= I'll try to have a good time.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark78>>7    comparative structures with as and than

We can leave out words after as and than, if the meaning is clear.

The weather isn't as good as last year. (= ... as it was last year.)

I found more blackberries than you. (= ... than you found.)

For missing subject or object after as and than (e.g. as was expected),
see 581.    ►

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark79>>8    question-word clauses

Clauses can be dropped after question words.

Somebody's been stealing our flowers, but I don't know who.

(= ... I don't know who's been stealing our flowers.)

Become a successful writer. This book shows you how.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark80>>9    that and relative pronouns

In an informal style, the conjunction that is often dropped (see 584);
object relative pronouns can also be dropped (see 495.4).

I knew (that) she didn't want to help me.

This is the restaurant (which) I was talking about.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark81>>10    reduced relative structures: the
tickets available etc

We can sometimes leave out a relative pronoun and the verb be before
participles or adjectives such as available, possible. For details, see
498.10. Who's the girl dancing with your brother? (= ... who is dancing
...)

Please let me have all the tickets available. (= ... that are
available.)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark82>>11    be after conjunctions

Subject pronouns with forms of be can be left out after certain
conjunctions, especially in a formal style.

Start when ready. (= ... when you are ready.)

Though intelligent, he was very poorly educated.

(= Though he was intelligent...)

When ordering, please send £1.50 for postage and packing.

Phone me if (it is) necessary. He had a small heart attack while asleep.
I^{p}m enclosing my cheque for £50, as agreed. Leave in oven until
cooked.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark83>>12    prepositions

In an informal style, prepositions can be dropped in a few time
expressions (see 451).

See you (on) Monday night.

We're staying here (for) another three months.

What time shall I come? (More natural than At what time ...T)

For cases like We need a place to live (in)> see 431.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark84>>13    pronouns after prepositions

In British English, pronoun objects can sometimes be dropped after
prepositions. This happens, for example, when have or with are used in
descriptive structures.

My socks have got holes in (them).

I d like a piece of toast with butter on (it).

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark85>>14    abbreviated styles

In certain styles, many or all non-essential words can be dropped. For
details, see 1.

Take 500g butter and place in small saucepan.

Single man looking for flat Oxford area WOMAN WALKS ON MOON

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark86>>178 ellipsis (2): with and, but and or

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark87>>1    various kinds of word left out

When expressions are joined by and, but or or, we often leave out
repeated words or phrases of various kinds.

a knife and (a) fork    antique (furniture) or modern furniture

these men and (these) women in France, (in) Germany or (in) Spain ripe
apples and (ripe) pears She can read, but (she) can't write.

The Minister likes golf but (the Minister) hates fishing.

We drove (across America), rode (across America), flew (across America)
and walked across America.

She was poor but (she was) honest.

The food (is ready) and the drinks are ready.

Phil (washed the dishes) and Sally washed the dishes.

We can sometimes drop a verb that is repeated in a different form.

I have always paid my bills and I always will (pay...).

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark88>>2    word order

Note that when two verbs, objects etc are the same, it is not always the
second that is left out. We may have to leave out the first to avoid
conftision, or to produce a simpler word order and sentence structure.

Cats (catch mice) and dogs catch mice. (not Cate catch mice-and-dogs.)

I can (go) and will go.

In informal speech and writing, ellipsis does not usually interrupt the
normal word order of a clause or sentence. Sentences like the following
are typical of a more formal style.

Peter planned and fane paid for the holiday. (Less formal: Peter planned
the holiday and Jane paid for it.)

Kevin likes dancing and Annie athletics. (Less formal: Kevin likes
dancing and Annie likes athletics.)

The children will carry the small boxes and the adults the large ones.

Jane went to Greece and Alice to Rome.

You seem, and she certainly is, ill.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark89>>3    other conjunctions

Ellipsis is not normally possible after other conjunctions besides and,
but and or.

She didn't know where she was when she woke up. (not ... when woke up:)
However, ellipsis of subject pronouns with forms of be is possible in
some cases (e.g. if possible, when arriving). See 261.6, 73.4, 411.6.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark90>>4    (and) then

In an informal style, ellipsis is sometimes possible after then, even if
and is dropped.

Peter started first, (and) then Colin (started).

For singular or plural verbs after expressions with and or or, see
532.2.

For singular and plural verbs with neither... nor, see 373.

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark91>>179 ellipsis (3): at the beginning of a
sentence

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark92>>1    words that can be left out

In informal spoken English we often leave out unstressed words at the
beginning of a sentence if the meaning is clear without them. Words that
can be left out include articles {the, a/an), possessives (my, your
etc), personal pronouns (I, you etc), auxiliary verbs {am, have etc) and
the preparatory subject there.

Car's running badly. (= The car's ...)

Wife's on holiday. (= My wife's ...)

Couldn't understand a word. (= I couldn't...)

Must dash. (= I must dash.)

Won't work, you know. (= It won't work ...)

Seen Joe? (= Have you seen Joe?)

Keeping well, I hope? (= You're keeping well...)

Nobody at home. (= There's nobody at home.)

Careful what you say. (= Be careful...)

Be four pounds fifty: (= That'll be ...)

This structure is common in advertisements. Two real examples:

Thinking of postgraduate study? Call for a place now. (= Are you
thinking...?)

Speak a foreign language? Speak it better (= Do you speak ...?)

<<main-11.xhtml#bookmark93>>2    unstressed forms of be, will, would,
have

We do not usually drop words so as to begin sentences with unstressed
forms of be, will, would or auxiliary have (though this sometimes
happens in postcards, diary entries and other kinds of very informal
writing).

I'm coming tomorrow, or Coming tomorrow. (but not Am-coming tomorrow. Am
is not stressed.)

I'll see you soon or See you soon (but not Will see you soon Will is not
stressed.)

Haven't seen him. (but not Have-seen him. Have is not stressed.)

<<main-12.xhtml>>

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark0>>3    before pronouns: You ready?

Auxiliary verbs can be left out before personal pronouns except I and
it.

You ready? (= Are you ready?)

She want something? (= Does she want something?)

(but not I kite? It raining?)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark1>>4    Dutch, aren't you?

Ellipsis is very common in sentences that have some sort of tag (see
487-488, 514) on the end, especially in British English.

Can't swim, myself Like a cigar, I do Dutch, aren't you?

Getting in your way, am I? Going on holiday, your kids?

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark2>>180    ellipsis (4): in noun phrases

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark3>>1    ellipsis after adjectives: boiled,
please

A repeated noun can sometimes be dropped after an adjective, if the
meaning is clear, especially when one is talking about common kinds of
choice.

What kind of potatoes would you like?* Boiled (potatoes), please.

We haven't got any large eggs. Only small (eggs).

This often happens after superlatives.

I think I'll buy the cheapest Note that nouns are not normally dropped
in other situations.

Poor little boy! (not Poor Uttle!)

The most important thing is to keep calm, (not The most important is
to...) For ocher structures in which adjectives are used without nouns,
see 17.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    ellipsis after this, numbers,
possessives etc

Nouns can also be dropped after most determiners (see 154), if the
meaning is clear.

This is Helen's coat, and that (coat) is mine.

This also happens after numbers, nouns with possessive *5, own and
(an)other. Vm not sure how many packets I need, but I'll take two
(packets) to start with.

Our train's the second (train) from this platform You take Pete's car,
and I'll take Susie's (car).

Can I borrow your pen?*No, find your own (pen).

That beer went down fast * Have another (beer).

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    well-known names

The last words of well-known names are often dropped.

She's playing the Beethoven with the London Philharmonic tomorrow night
the Beethoven violin concerto with the London Philharmonic Orchestra
...)

He's staying at the Hilton. {= ... the Hilton Hotel.)

We're going to see Hamlet' at the Mermaid. (= ... the Mermaid Theatre.)
When we talk about people's houses and shops, the words house and shop
are often dropped (see 439.4).

We spent the weekend at John and Mary's.

Could you pick up some chops from the butcher's?

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark6>>181    ellipsis (5): after auxiliary verbs

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark7>>1 auxiliary instead of complete verb phrase

We can avoid repetition by using an auxiliary verb instead of a complete
verb phrase, if the meaning is clear. The auxiliary verb usually has a
'strong^{1} pronunciation (see 616), and contractions (see 143) are not
normally used except in negatives.    ►

Get up.*I am /aem/. (= I am getting up.)

He said he'd write, but he hasn't. (=... hasn't written.)

I'll come and see you when I can. (= ... can come and see you.)

Shall I tell him what I think?* I wouldn't if I were you.

Do can be used before ellipsis if there is no other auxiliary to repeat.

I may come to London. I'll phone you if I do He said he would arrive
before seven, and he did.

Other words, as well as the rest of the verb phrase, can be left out
after the auxiliary.

7 can't see you today, but I can tomorrow. (= ... I can see you ...)

I've forgotten the address. *1 have too.

You're not trying very hard.*I am.

You wouldn't have won if I hadn't helped you. * Yes, I would.

This also happens after non-auxiliary be and have.

I'm tired. * I am too.    Who's the driver? * I am

Who has a dictionary? * I have.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark8>>2    short answers etc: Yes, I have.

Ellipsis is used regularly in short answers (see 517), reply questions
(see 484) and question tags (see 487-488).

Have you finished?* Yes, I have.

I can whistle through my fingers. * Can you, dear?

You don't want to buy a car, do you?

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark9>>3    so am I etc

Ellipsis also happens after so (see 541), neither and nor (see 374).
Note the word order.

I've forgotten the address. * So have 7.

She doesn't like olives, and neither do I.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark10>>4    ellipsis before complete form

Ellipsis normally happens when an expression is used for a second time,
after the complete form has already been used once (see above examples).
However, it can sometimes happen the other way round. This is common in
sentences beginning with if.

If you can, send me a postcard when you arrive.

If you could, I'd like you to help me this evening.

If you prefer, we can go tomorrow instead.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark11>>5    more than one auxiliary

When there is more than one auxiliary, ellipsis usually happens after
the first. You wouldn't have enjoyed the film.* Yes, I would. (= ... I
would have enjoyed the film.)

However, more auxiliaries can be included. The first is stressed.

Could you have been dreaming?* I suppose I could / could have t could
have been.

We often include a second auxiliary verb if it has not appeared before
in the same form.

7 think Mary should be told. *She has been. (More natural than ... She
has.)

And we normally include a second auxiliary verb after a change of modal
auxiliary.

Mary should be told,*She must be. (More natural than ... She must)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark12>>6 substitution with do

In British English, a main verb that is left out after an auxiliary can
be replaced by do. For details, see 161.

Do you think he'll phone?* He might do. (AmE ...He might)

For do so, see 162.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark13>>182 ellipsis (6): infinitives

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark14>>1    to used instead of whole infinitive

We can use to instead of the whole infinitive of a repeated verb (and
following words), if the meaning is clear.

Are you and Gillian getting married?* We hope to.

Let's go for a walk. *1 don't want to.

I don't dance much now, but I used to a lot Sorry I shouted at you. I
didn't mean to.

Somebody ought to clean up the bathroom. *Yll ask John to.

Be and have (used for possession) are not usually dropped.

There are more flowers than there used to be. (not ... than there used
to.) She hasn't been promoted yet, but she ought to be. (not ... but she
ought to.) You've got more freckles than you used to have. (not
You^{l}ve got morefreekies than you used to.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark15>>2    ellipsis of whole infinitive

In some cases the whole infinitive can be left out. This happens after
nouns and adjectives.

He'll never leave home; he hasn't got the courage (to).

You can't force him to leave home if he's not ready (to).

It also happens after verbs which can stand alone without a following
infinitive.

Can you start the car?*I'll tty (to).

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark16>>3    (would) like, want etc

We cannot usually leave out to after would likel love I hate I prefer,
want and choose.

Are you interested in going to University?* I'd like to. (not ..Yd
like.)

My parents encouraged me to study art, but I didn't want to. (not ..
.-I-didn\^t want)

However, to is often dropped after want, and almost always after like,
when these are used after certain conjunctions - for instance when_{t}
if what, as. Come when you want (to).

I'll do what I like.    Stay as long as you like.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark17>>183    else

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark18>>1    use

We use else to mean 'other* after:

somebody, someone, something, somewhere; anybody, everybody, nobody etc;
question words; whatever, whenever etc; little, much.

Would you like anything else?

I^{f}m sorry. I mistook you for somebody else.

Where else did you go besides Madrid?

Whatever else he may be, he's not a mathematician.

We know when Shakespeare was born and when he died, but we don't know
much else about his life.

In a formal style, else is sometimes used after all.

When all else fails, read the instructions.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark19>>2    word order

Note that else comes immediately after the word it modifies.

What else would you like? (not What-would you like else?)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark20>>3    else's

Else has a possessive else's.

You're wearing somebody else's coat

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark21>>4    singular only

There is no plural structure with else.

I didn't see any other people, (not ... any else people.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark22>>5    or else

Or else means 'otherwise*, 'if not*.

Lets go, or else we'll miss the train.

Or else is sometimes used with no continuation, as a threat.

You'd better stop hitting my little brother, or else!

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark23>>6    elsewhere

This is a formal word for somewhere else.

If you are not satisfied with my hospitality, go elsewhere.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark24>>184    emphasis

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark25>>1 emotive and contrastive emphasis

We often emphasise ('strengthen*) a particular word or expression. There
are two main reasons for this. We may wish to show that we feel strongly
about what we are saying ('emotive emphasis*).

You do look nice today!

Your hair looks so good like that

Or we may wish to show a contrast between, for example, true and false,
or present and past, or a rule and an exception (‘contrastive
emphasis').

Why weren't you at the meeting?*! was at the meeting.

I don't do much sport now, but I did play football when I was younger.

I don't see my family much, but I do visit my mother occasionally.

We can also use emphasis to show that something expected actually
happened.

I thought I'd pass the exam, and I did pass.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark26>>2    pronunciation: stress

In speech, we can give words extra stress - make them sound ‘stronger' -
by pronouncing them louder and with a higher intonation (see 554). We
may also make the vowel longer, and pause before a stressed word. Stress
is reflected in printing by using italics or bold type, and in writing
by using CAPITAL letters or by underlining.

This is the last opportunity.

He lived in France, not Spain.

Mary, I'm IN LOVE! Please don't tell anybody!

Changes in stress can affect the meaning of a sentence. Compare:

Jane phoned me yesterday. (Not somebody else.)

Jane phoned me yesterday. (She didn't come to see me.)

Jane phoned me yesterday. (She didn't phone you.)

Jane phoned me yesterday. (Not today.)

We often stress auxiliary verbs. This can make the whole sentence sound
more emphatic, or can emphasise a contrast (see above). Most auxiliary
verbs change their pronunciation when they are stressed (see 616).

You have grownI

I am telling the truth - you must believe me!

In emphatic sentences without auxiliary verbs we add do to carry stress.

Do sit down.    She does like you.

If he does decide to come, let me know; will you?

With stressed auxiliary verbs, word order can change (see 24.9).
Compare: You have certainly grown. You certainly have grown!

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark27>>3    vocabulary: special words

Words such as so, such, really and Just can show emphasis.

Thank you so much. It was such a lovely party. I really enjoyed it.

I just LOVE the way she talks. (Note: love is stressed, not just.)

Swearwords (see 575) are often used for emphasis in an informal style.

That's a bloody good idea.

Question words can be emphasised by adding ever (see 624), on earth or
the hell (very informal).

Why ever did he marry her?

What on earth is she doing here?    Where the hell have you been?

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark28>>4    structures

If we can move words to an unusual position, this usually gives them
more importance. Words are often 'fronted' for this reason (see 513).

That film - what did you think of it?    Asleep, then, were you?

I knew he was going to cause trouble, and cause trouble he did!    ►

'Cleft' structures with if, what etc can be used to focus on particular
parts of a sentence and give them extra importance (see 130-131).

It was John who paid for the drinks.

What I need is a good rest.

Do can be used to emphasise an affirmative verb (see above).

She does seem to be trying,    Do come in.

Myself yourself etc can be used to emphasise nouns (see 493).

I got a letter from the Managing Director himself Indeed can be used to
emphasise very with an adjective or adverb (see 273).

I was very surprised indeed.

Very can emphasise superlatives, next, last, first and same (see 140.4).

Yd like a bottle of your very best wine.

The letter arrived on the very next day.

We were born in the very same street in the very same year.

Repetition can be used for emphasis (see 500.7).

She looks much, much older than she used to.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark29>>185 end and finish: verbs

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark30>>1    both used

These verbs have similar meanings, and are often both possible.

What time does the concert end/finish?

Term ends/finishes on June 23.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark31>>2    completing an activity

When we talk about completing something that we are doing, we usually
prefer finish.

She's always starting something new, but she never finishes anything.

You'll never finish that hamburger - it's too big for you.

Are you still writing letters?* No, Yve finished.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark32>>3    changes

End is more common when there is an important change.

I decided it was time to end our affair.

It's time to end the uncertainty - the Prime Minister must speak out The
Second World War ended in 1945.

We also prefer end to talk about a special way of bringing something to
a close or ‘shaping' the end of something.

How do you end a letter to somebody you don't know?

The ceremony ended with a speech from the President End is often used to
talk about physical shapes.

The road ended in a building site, (not The road finished...)

Nouns that end in -s have plurals in -es.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark33>>4    -ing forms

Finish, but not end, can be followed by an -ing form (see 296).

I finished teaching at 3.00. (not bended teaching...)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark34>>186    enjoy

Enjoy normally has an object.

Did you enjoy the party?* Yes, I enjoyed it very much, (not / enjoyed
very

TTttxen.)

To talk about having a good time, we can use enjoy myself!yourself etc.

I really enjoyed myself when I went to Rome.

We're going to Paris for the weekend.* Enjoy yourselves!

{'Enjoy!' with no object is possible, especially in informal AmE.)

Enjoy can be followed by -ing.

I don't enjoy looking after small children, (not ... enjoy-to-loek-...)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark35>>187    enough

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    adjective/adverb + enough

Enough usually follows adjectives and adverbs.

Is it warm enough for you? (not .. . enough-warm -...)

You're not driving fast enough.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    enough + noun

Enough can also be used before a noun as a determiner.

Have you got enough milk?    There aren't enough glasses.

Enough is occasionally used after a noun, but this is rare in modern
English except in a few expressions.

If only we had time enough ...

I was fool enough to believe him.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark38>>3    position with adjective + noun

When enough modifies an adjective and noun together, it comes before the
adjective. Compare:

We haven't got enough big nails.

(= We need more big nails - enough modifies big nails.)

We haven't got big enough nails.

(= We need bigger nails - enough modifies big.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark39>>4    enough or enough off

Before determiners (e.g. a, the, my, this, that) and pronouns, we use
enough of Compare:

-    I don't know enough French to read this, (not ... enough of French
...)

I don^{1}1 understand enough of the words in the letter.

-    We haven't got enough blue paint, (not ...-enough-of-blue paint)

We haven't got enough of that blue paint.

-    You didn't buy enough cards, (not .. .-enough of cards)

You didn't buy enough of them.

Note the idiomatic structure Vve had enough of... .This can be followed
by a noun without a determiner.

I've had enough of mathematics; I'm going to give it up.

She's had enough of England; she's going back home.    ►

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark40>>5    enough without a noun

Enough can be used alone without a noun to refer to an amount, if the
meaning is clear.

Haifa pound of carrots will be enough.

That's enough, thank you.

Enough is enough.

but not The meat-is-entntgh.

(The meat is not an amount.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark41>>6    enough + infinitive; structure with for

We can use an infinitive structure after enough.

She's old enough to do what she wants.

I haven't got enough money to buy a car.

Infinitives can be introduced by for + noun/pronoun.

Its late enough for the staff to stop work.

There was just enough light for us to see what we were doing.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark42>>7    It's small enough to put in your
pocket, etc

The subject of the sentence can be the object of the following
infinitive. (For more about this structure, see 284.4.) Object pronouns
are not normally used after the infinitive in this case.

The radio's small enough to put in your pocket.

(not ... to put it-in your-pocket:)

Those tomatoes aren't ripe enough to eat (not ... to eat them.)

However, object pronouns are possible in structures with for.

The radio was small enough for me to put (it) in my pocket Those
tomatoes aren't ripe enough for the children to eat (them).

For other examples of for + object + infinitive, see 291.

For similar structures with too and too much/many, see 595-596.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark43>>8    the = enough; leaving out enough

The article the can be used to mean 'enough^{1}.

I hardly had the strength to take my clothes off.

I didn't quite have the money to pay for a meal Time and room are often
used to mean ‘enough time' and ‘enough room'. Have you got time to look
at this letter?

There isn't room for everybody to sit down.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark44>>188 especial(ly) and special(ly)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark45>>1    especially and specially

Especially and specially can often both be used with the same meaning.

It was not (especially cold

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark46>>2    especially meaning 'above all'

Especially is often used to mean ‘above all'.

We play a lot of tennis, especially on Sundays.

The children are very noisy, especially when we have visitors.

I like all kinds of fruit, especidlly apples.

Especially follows a subject.

All my family like music. My father, especially, goes to as many
concerts as he can. (not ... Especially my father goes...)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark47>>3    especially before prepositions and
conjunctions

We prefer especially before prepositions and conjunctions.

We go skiing quite a lot, especially in February.

I drink a lot of coffee, especially when I'm working.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark48>>4    specially with past participles

Specially is used with a past participle to mean ‘for a particular
purpose*. These shoes were specially made for me.

The song was specially written for his birthday.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark49>>5    especial and special

The adjective especial is rare. We normally use special.

He took special trouble over his work.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark50>>189 even

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark51>>1    meaning

Even suggests the idea of a surprising extreme: 'more than we expect';
not even suggests 'less than we expect*.

She's rude to everybody. She's even rude to the police.

He can't even write his own name.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark52>>2    position

Even most often goes with the verb, in mid-position (see 24).

She has broken all her toys. She has even broken her bike, (not Even she
has broken-...)

He speaks lots of languages. He even speaks Esperanto.

They're open every day. They're even open on Christmas Day.

Even goes at the beginning of a clause when it refers just to the
subject; and it can go just before other words and expressions that we
want to emphasise. Anybody can do this. Even a child can do it.

I work every day, even on Sundays.

I haven't written to anybody for months - not even my parents.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark53>>3    even and also

Also (see 46) is not used to talk about surprising extremes.

Everybody helped with the packing - even the dog. (not ... also the
dog.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark54>>4    even if and even though

Even is not used as a conjunction, but we can use even before if and
though. Even if I become a millionaire, I shall always be a socialist,
(not ... Even I become...)

Even though I didn't know anybody at the party, I had a nice time.

(not Even although ...)    ►

I wouldn't marry you even if you were the last man in the world.

We sometimes use if to mean even if

M do it if it kills me. (= ... even if it kills me.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark55>>5 even so; even now

Even so means ‘however', ‘in spite of that'.

He seems nice. Even so, I don't really trust him. (not ... Even
thoughyl-denH really-trmt-him;)

Even now can mean 'in spite of everything that has happened'.

He left her ten years ago, but even now she still loves him.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark56>>190    eventual(ly)

Eventual and eventually mean ‘final(ly)', ‘in the end', ‘after all
that'. We use them to say that something happens after a long time or a
lot of effort.

The chess game lasted for three days. Androv was the eventual winner.

The car didn't want to start, but eventually I got it going.

We use at last (see 204), not eventually, to give news.

Steve has found a job at last! (not Stet&-ha$--eventuatty-foundr-a-job!)
Eventual and eventually are ‘false friends' for people who speak some
languages. They do not mean the same as, for instance, French eventuel
or eventuellement, and are not used to express the idea of possibility.
For this meaning we use possible, perhaps, if may, might etc.

In our new house I'd like to have a spare bedroom for possible visitors.

(not ... eventual visitors.)

I'm not sure what I'll do next year. I might go to America if I can find
a job (not ... Eventually I'll go to America ...)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark57>>191    ever

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark58>>1    ever meaning 'at any time'

Ever is a ‘non-affirmative word' (see 381). It is used especially in
questions to mean ‘at any time'. Compare:

Do you ever go to Ireland on holiday? (= at any time)

We always go to Ireland on holiday. (= every time)

We never have holidays in England. (= at no time)

Ever is possible in negative clauses, but never is more usual than not
ever.

I don't ever want to see you again, (or I never want...)

We also use ever after if and with words that express a negative idea
(like nobody_{f} hardly or stop).

Come and see us if you are ever in Manchester.

Nobody ever visits them.    I hardly ever see my sister.

I'm going to stop her ever doing that again.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark59>>2    with comparatives, superlatives, as and
only

Ever is used in affirmative clauses in comparisons and with only.

You're looking lovelier than ever.

What is the best book you've ever read?

It's the largest picture ever painted.

He's as charming as ever.

She's the only woman ever to have climbed Everest in winter.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark60>>3    ever + perfect

Ever is often used with perfect tenses (see 455,423) to mean ‘at any
time up to now/then'.

Have you ever been to Greece?

Had you ever thought of getting married before you met June?

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark61>>4    ever and before; ever before

Ever and before can both be used to mean ‘at any time in the past', but
there is a difference. Before (or ever before) refers to a present
event, and asks whether it has happened at another time.

Have you (ever) been to Scotland before? (The hearer is probably in
Scotland.)

Ever (without before) does not refer to a present event.

Have you ever been to Africa? (The hearer is not in Africa.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark62>>5    ever meaning 'always'

Ever is not normally used to mean ‘always*.

I shall always remember you. (not / shall ever remember you.)

But ever is sometimes used to mean ‘always* in compound expressions with
adjectives and participles.

his ever-open mouth    an ever-increasing debt

evergreen trees    his ever-loving wife

Ever also means ‘always' in forever (or for ever) and ever since, and in
a few other expressions like ever after and Yours ever (used at the end
of letters).

I shall love you forever.    Vve loved you ever since I met you.

For who ever, what ever etc, see 624.

For whoever, whatever etc, see 625.

For Jorever with progressive forms* see 472.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark63>>192    ever so, ever such

These expressions are often used in informal British English to mean
‘very*. She's ever so nice.    It's ever such a good film.

For the difference between so and such, see 569.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark64>>193    every (one)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark65>>1 every + singular

Every is a determiner (see 154). We normally use it before a singular
noun (but see paragraph 6). If the noun is a subject, its verb is also
singular.

every + singular noun (+ singular verb)

I see her every day. (not ... every days:)

Every room is being used (not Every roorrt are-...)    ►

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark66>>2    every one of

We use every one of before a pronoun or a determiner (for example the,
my, these-see 154). The pronoun or noun is plural, but a following verb
is singular.

every one of us/you/them (+ singular verb)

every one of+ determiner + plural noun (+ singular verb)

His books are wonderful I've read every one of them.

Every one of the children was crying.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark67>>3    every one without a noun

We can drop a noun and use every one alone, if the meaning is clear.

His books are great Every one's worth reading.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark68>>4    negative structures

To negate every, we normally use not every.

Not every kind of bird can fly.

(More natural than Every kind of bird cannot fly.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark69>>5    pronouns and possessives

When a pronoun or possessive is used later in a clause to refer back to
every (one), the later word can usually be either singular (more formal)
or plural (less formal).

Every person made his/her own travel arrangements.

Every person made their own travel arrangements.

I told every single student what I thought of him/her/them.

But if we are talking about something that concerns every member of a
group at the same time, a plural word is necessary.

When every passenger's ticket had been checked, the door opened and they
all got on. (not .. .-and hetehe-aU got on-)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark70>>6    every + piural noun

Every is used before a plural noun in expressions that refer to
intervals.

I see her every few days.    There's a meeting every six weeks.

She had to stop and rest every two or three steps.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark71>>7    everybody etc

Everybody, everyone, everything and everywhere are used with singular
verbs, like every.

Everybody has gone home. (not Everybody-hove...)

Everything I like is either illegal, immoral or fattening.

I found that everywhere was booked up.

When possessives and pronouns refer back to everybody/one, they can
usually be either singular (more formal) or plural (less formal).
Sometimes only a plural word makes sense. Compare:

Has everybody got his or her ticket? (more formal)

Has everybody got their tickets? (less formal)

When everybody had finished eating, the waiters took away their plates.
(not ... his or her plate.)

Note that everyone (= ‘everybody') does not mean the same as every one
(which can refer to things as well as people - see paragraph 2 above).

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark72>>8    everyday

Everyday is an adjective meaning ‘ordinary*, ‘usual*, ‘routine*. It is
not the same as the adverbial expression every day. Compare:

In everyday life, you don't often find an elephant in a supermarket.

You don't see elephants every day.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark73>>9    common expressions

Note the following common expressions with every. every single

She visits her mother every single day. every other

We meet every other Tuesday. (= ... every second Tuesday.) every so
often; every now and then

We go out for a drink together every so often / every now and then.

For the difference between every and each, see 170.

For every and all, see 39.    For every and any, see 56.

For more information about everybody I everyone, see 548.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark74>>194 except and except for

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark75>>1    except for before nouns

We generally use except for before noun phrases.

Vve cleaned the house except for the bathroom.

The garden was empty except for one small bird.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark76>>2    except (for) after all, any etc

After generalising words like all, any, every, no, everything, anybody,
nowhere, nobody, whole, we often leave out for.

Vve cleaned all the rooms except (for) the bathroom.

He ate everything on his plate except (for) the beans.

Nobody came except (for) John and Mary.

But this does not happen before all, etc.

Except for John and Mary, nobody came, (not Except John and Maryi nobody
came.)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark77>>3    except before prepositions and
conjunctions

We use except, not except for, before prepositions and conjunctions.

It's the same everywhere except in Scotland.

(not ... except for in Scotland.)

He's good-looking except when he smiles.

This room is no use except as a storeroom.

The holiday was nice except that there wasn't enough snow.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark78>>4    except (for) + pronoun

After except (for) we use object pronouns, not subject pronouns.

Everybody understood except (for) me. (not ... except I.)

We're all ready except (for) her.    ►

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark79>>5    except + verb: he does nothing except
eat

A common structure is do ... except + infinitive without to.

He does nothing except eat all day.

I'll do everything for you except cook.

In other cases an -ing form is usually necessary.

She's not interested in anything except skiing.

You needn't worry about anything except having a great time.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark80>>6    except and without

Except (for) is only used to talk about exceptions to generalisations.
In other cases, without or but for may be better. Compare:

Nobody helped me except you.

Without / But for your help, I would have failed.

(not Except for your help, I would have-failed.)

For the use of but to mean ‘except', see 116.

For the difference between except, besides and apart from, see 102.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark81>>195 exclamations: structures

Exclamations are often constructed with how and what or with so and
such; negative question forms are also common.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark82>>1    exclamations with how

These are often felt to be a little formal or old-fashioned.

how + adjective

Strawberries! How nice!

how + adjective/adverb + subject + verb

How cold it is! (not How it-is-e&id!)

How beautifully you sing! (not How you sing beautifully!)

how + subject + verb How you've grown!

For the structure of expressions like How strange a remark, see 14.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark83>>2    exclamations with what

what a/an (+ adjective) + singular countable noun

What a rude man! (not What rude-man!)

What a nice dress! (not What nice dress!)

What a surprise!

what (+ adjective) + uncountable/plural noun

What beautiful weather! (not What a-beautiful weather!)

What lovely flowers!

What fools!

what + object + subject + verb (note word order)

What a beautiful smile your sister has! (not ... has your sister!)

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark84>>3    exclamations with so and such

so + adjective

You're so kind!

such a/an (+ adjective) + singular countable noun

He's such a nice boy! (not ... ■ormehr-nice-boy!)

such (+ adjective) + uncountable/plural noun

They talk such rubbish! (not ... such a rubbish!)

They're such kind people! (not ... so kind people!)

For more information about such and so, see 569.

<<main-12.xhtml#bookmark85>>4    negative question forms

Isn't the weather nice!    Hasn^{f}t she grown!

Americans and some British speakers may use ordinary (non-negative)
question forms in exclamations.

Boy, am I hungry!

Wow, did she make a mistake!

Was I furious!

For more information about negative questions, see 368.

<<main-13.xhtml>>

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark0>>196 expect, hope, wait and look forward

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark1>>1    expect and hope: difference of meaning

Expecting is mental rather than emotional. If I expect something to
happen, I have a good reason to think it will in fact happen. Hoping is
more emotional. If I hope for something to happen, I would like it to
happen, but I do not know whether it will. Compare:

-    I'm expecting John to phone at three o'clock I hope he's got some
good news.

-    Lucy's expecting a baby. (= She's pregnant.)

She's hoping it will be a girl.

One can expect good or bad things, but one only hopes for things that
one wants.

I expect it will rain at the weekend. But I hope it won't.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    expect and wait difference of meaning

One waits when somebody or something is late, when one is early for
something, or when one wants time to pass so that something will happen.
Waiting is often physical - the word suggests, for example, standing or
sitting somewhere until something happens.

Compare:

-    I'm expecting a phone call from John at three o'clock, (not I'm
waiting f&rti

phone call-from John at three o'clock.)

I hope he rings on time. I hate waiting for people to phone, (not I-hate
expecting people to phone.)    ►

-    He expects to get a bike for his birthday. (= He thinks he'll get
one.)

It's hard to wait for things when you're five years old.

-    I expected her at ten, but she didn't turn up.

I waited for her till eleven, and then went home.

Can't wait often expresses impatience.

I can't wait for the holidays!

When we say that we expect a person, this usually means that he/she is
coming to our home, office etc. Compare:

Come and see me this afternoon. 1'U expect you at 4.00.

Let's meet at the cinema. I'll be there at 6.00. (not fll expect you at
6:00.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    look forward: meaning

Look forward means ‘think about (something in the future) with
pleasure*. One looks forward to something that is certain to happen, and
that one is glad about.

He's looking forward to his birthday See you on Sunday. look forward to
it.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark4>>4    all four expressions compared

Compare:

I expect to hear from her. (= I'm pretty sure I'll get a letter from
her.)

I hope to hear from her. (= I'm not sure whether she'll write, but I
would like her to.)

Vm waiting to hear from her. (= I need her letter to come; perhaps it's
late.) I look forward to hearing from her. {= I feel pleasure at the
thought that I will hear from her.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark5>>5    structures

a + object: expect, hope for,, wait for, look forward to

Compare:

We're expecting rain soon.

We're hoping for a lot of rain - the garden's very dry.

We've been waiting for rain for weeks.

Ym looking forward to the autumn.

b + infinitive (with to): expect/hope/wait

We expect to spend the summer in France.

We hope to see Anne marie while we're there.

But we're still waiting to hear from her.

(but not Ym looking forward to see-Annemarie.)

Before an infinitive, simple and progressive forms of hope and expect
can often be used with little difference of meaning.

We hope / We're hoping to get to Scotland next weekend.

We expect / We're expecting to hear from Lucy today.

c + object + infinitive: expect, hope for, wait for

I expect him to arrive about ten o'clock.

We're hoping for John to come up with some new ideas.

Vm still waiting for Harry to pay me back that money Expect is often
used with object + infinitive to talk about people's duties.

We expect you to work on the Jirst Saturday of every month.

Passive versions of the structure are also common.

Staff are expected to start work punctually at 8.30.

d + -ing form: look forward to

Look forward can be followed by to... ing, but not by an infinitive (see
298.2). I look forward to meeting you. (not ... to meet you.)

I look forward to hearing from you. (common formula at the end of a
letter) Simple and progressive forms can often be used with litde
difference of meaning.

I look forward / Vm looking forward to the day when the children leave
home.

e + that-clause: expect, hope

I expect (that) shell be here soon. I hope (that) III recognise her.

(but not Vm waiting that she arrives.)

Before a that-clause, progressive forms of expect are not normally used.

I expect (that) she ll be here soon, (not Vm expecting (that) ...)

I expect (that) ... can be used to talk about the present or past, with
the meaning of 'I suppose', ‘I have good reason to think'.

I expect you're all tired after your journey.

Sarah isn't here. I expect she was too tired to come.

Before a that-clause, simple and progressive forms of hope can often be
used with litde difference of meaning.

We hope / We're hoping you can come and stay with us soon.

Hope is often followed by a present tense with a future meaning (see
250).

I hope she doesn't miss the train.

f expect something of somebody

This structure refers to people's feelings about how other people ought
to behave.

My parents expected too much of me when I was at school - they were
terribly upset when I failed my exams.

For hope and expect in negative clauses, see 369.

For not and so after hope and expect, see 539.

For and after tuait, see 53.    For wish, see 630.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark6>>197 experiment and experience

An experiment is a test which somebody does to see what the result will
be, or to prove something. Experiment is generally used with the verb
do. There is also a verb to experiment.

We did an experiment in the chemistry lesson, to see if you could get
chlorine gas from salt, (not We did an experience...)    ►

I'm experimenting with a new perfume.

An experience is something that you live through; something that happens
to you in life. Experience is generally used with the verb have. There
is also a verb to experience.

I had a lot of interesting experiences during my year in Africa. (not
Imade-a lot of interesting-experiences...)

Have you ever experienced the feeling that you were going mad? (not Have
you ever experimented the feeling...?)

The uncountable noun experience means ‘the knowledge that you get from
doing things'.

Sales person wanted - experience unnecessary.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark7>>198 explain

After explain, we use to before an indirect object.

I explained my problem to her. (not / explained her my-probiem.)

Can you explain to me how to get to your house? (not Can you

199 fairly, quite, rather and pretty:

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark8>>adverbs of degree

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark9>>1    fairly

Fairly generally modifies adjectives and adverbs. It does not suggest a
very high degree: if you say that somebody is fairly nice or fairly
clever, for example, he or she will not be very pleased.

How was the film? ~ Fairly good. Not the best one I^{f}ve seen this
year.

I speak Russian fairly well - enough for everyday purposes.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark10>>2    quite

Quite (especially in British English) suggests a higher degree than
fairly.

How was the film? * Quite good. You ought to go.

It's quite a difficult book - I had trouble with it.

He's lived in St Petersburg, so he speaks Russian quite well.

Quite can modify verbs and nouns.

I quite enjoyed myself at your party. The room was quite a mess.

For word order rules, the use of quite to mean ‘completely', and other
details, see 489.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark11>>3    rather

Rather is stronger than quite. It can suggest ‘more than is usual',
‘more than was expected', ‘more than was wanted', and similar ideas.

How was the film?~ Rather good - I was surprised.

Maurice speaks Russian rather well. People often think he is Russian.

I think I'll put the heating on. It's rather cold.

I've had rather a long day.

Rather can modify verbs (especially verbs that refer to thoughts and
feelings) and nouns.

I rather think we're going to lose.    She rather likes gardening.

It was rather a disappointment

For word order rules and other details of the use of rather, see 490.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark12>>4 pretty

Pretty (informal) is like rather, but only modifies adjectives and
adverbs. How's things? ~ Pretty good. You OK?

You're driving pretty fast Pretty well means ‘almost^{1}.

I've pretty well finished.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark13>>200 far and a long way

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark14>>1    far in questions and negatives

Far is most common in questions and negative clauses.

How far did you walk? The youth hostel is not far from here.

In affirmative clauses we usually prefer a long way.

We walked a long way. (not We walked far.)

The station is a long way from here.

(More natural than The station is far from here.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark15>>2    far in affirmative clauses

However, far is normal in affirmative clauses with too, enough, as and
so. She's gone far enough. ~A bit too far.

It's ready as far as I know.

Any problems?~ OK so far.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark16>>3    far with comparatives etc

Far is also used (in all kinds of clauses) to modify comparatives,
superlatives and too.

She's far older than her husband.

This bike is by far the best You're far too young to get married.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark17>>4    before a noun: a far country

Far can be used as an adjective before a noun, meaning ‘distant'. This
is rather formal and old-fashioned.

Long ago, in a far country, there lived a woman who had seven sons.

Much, many and long (for time) are also more common in questions and
negative sentences (see 357 and 330).

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark18>>201    farther and further

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark19>>1    distance

We use both farther and further to talk about distance. They mean the
same. Edinburgh is farther/further away than York.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark20>>2    'additional'

Further (but not farther) can mean ‘additional', ‘extra', 'more
advanced'.

For further information, see page 6. College of Further Education

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark21>>202    feel

Feel has several different meanings. Progressive forms can be used with
some meanings, but not with others. Feel can be a ‘link verb' (see 328),
followed by an adjective or noun complement. It can also be an ordinary
verb, followed by a direct object.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark22>>1    link verb: I feel fine

Feel can be used to talk about one's physical or mental sensations.
Adjective or (in British English) noun complements are used.

I feel fine. Do you feel happy?

Andrew was beginning to feel cold

When Louise realised what she had done, she felt a complete idiot. (BrE)

In this sense feel is not normally used with reflexive pronouns {myself
exc). He always felt inferior when he was with hen (More natural than He
always felt himself inferior...)

To talk about feelings that are going on at a particular moment, simple
or progressive forms can be used. There is little difference of meaning.

I feel fine. f I*m feeling fine.

How do you feel? / How are you feeling?

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark23>>2    link verb: That feels nice!

Feel can also be used to say that something causes sensations.
Progressive forms are not used.

That feels nice! The glass felt cold against my lips.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark24>>3    link verb: feel like; feel as if/though

Feel can be followed by like or as iflthough.

My legs feel like cotton wool.

Alice felt as ifithough she was in a very nice dream.

(Alice felt like she was ... is also possible - see 74.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark25>>4    feel like meaning 'want^{1}

Feel like can also mean ‘want', ‘would like'.

I feel like a drink. Have you got any beer?

In this sense, feel like is often followed by an -ing form.

I felt like laughing, but I didn't dare.

Compare:

I felt like swimming. (= I wanted to swim.)

I felt like / as if I was swimming,; (= It seemed as if I was swimming.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark26>>5    ordinary verb: reactions and opinions

Feel is often used to talk about reactions and opinions. Progressive
forms are not usually used in this case.

I feel sure you're right, (not Fm-feeling sure-...)

He says he feels doubtful about the new plan.

TJwzr-clauses are common.

I feel (that) she's making a mistake.

A structure with object + to be + complement is possible in a formal
style, but it is not very often used.

I felt her to be unfriendly. (More normal: I felt that she was
unfriendly.) There is also a structure feel it (+ to be) +
adjective/noun.

We felt it necessary to call the police.

I felt it (to be) my duty to call the police.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark27>>6    ordinary verb: 'receive physical
sensations'

Feel can be used with a direct object to talk about the physical
sensations that come to us through the sense of touch.

I suddenly felt an insect crawling up my leg.

Progressive forms are not used, but we often use can feel to talk about
a sensation that is going on at a particular moment.

I can feel something biting me!

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark28>>7    ordinary verb: 'touch'

Feel can also be used with a direct object to mean ‘touch something to
learn about it or experience it'. Progressive forms are possible.

Feel the photocopier. It's very hot.

What are you doing? ~ Vm feeling the shirts to see if they're dry.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark29>>203 female and feminine; male and masculine

Female and male refer to the sex of people, animals and plants.

A female fox is called a vixen. A male duck is called a drake. Feminine
and masculine are used for qualities and behaviour that are felt to be
typical of men or women.

She has a very masculine laugh.

It was a very feminine bathroom.

Feminine and masculine are used for grammatical forms in some languages.
The word for ‘moori is feminine in French and masculine in German.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark30>>204    finally, at last, in the end and at
the end

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark31>>1    finally

Finally can suggest that one has been waiting a long time for something.
In this sense, it often goes in mid-position (with the verb - see 24).

After trying three times, she finally managed pass her exam.

Steve has finally found a job.

Finally can also introduce the last element in a series, like lastly
(see 157.10). We must increase productivity. We must reduce
unemployment. And finally; we must compete in world markets.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark32>>2    at last

At last also suggests - very strongly - the idea of impatience or
inconvenience resulting from a long wait or delay.

James has paid me that money at last

When at last they found him he was almost dead.

At last can be used as an exclamation. (Finally cannot be used in this
way.)

At last! Where the hell have you been?

Note that lastly (introducing the last item in a series) is not the same
as at last Firstly, we need to increase profits. Secondly,...
Thirdly,... And lastly, we need to cut down administrative expenses,
(not .. .-And-afrlast we need to cut down ...)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark33>>3    in the end

In the end suggests that something happens after changes or uncertainty.

We made eight different holiday plans, but in the end we went to
Brighton. I left in the middle of the film. Did they get married in the
end?

The tax man will get you in the end*

Another use of in the end is to mean ‘after we have considered
everything'. In the end, you can't get fit without exercise.

In the end, Mother knows best

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark34>>4    at the end

At the end simply refers to the position of something. There is no sense
of waiting or delay.

A declarative sentence has a full stop at the end.

I wish I was paid at the beginning of the week and not at the end.

For eventually, see 190.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark35>>205    finished

Finished can be used as an adjective meaning ‘ready^{1}.

Is the report finished yet?

With personal subjects, to be finished is often used in an informal
style with the same meaning as to have finished.

How soon will you befhave finished, dear?

I went to get the car from the garage, but they wereritJhadn't finished.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark36>>206    fit and suit

These words do not mean exacdy the same.

Fit refers to size and shape: if your clothes fit you, they are neither
too big nor too small.

These shoes don't fit me - have you got a larger size?

Suit refers to style, colour etc.

Red and black are colours that suit me very well (not .. .-colours-that
fit me very well)

Do you think this style suits me?

Suit can also be used to say whether arrangements are convenient.

Tuesday would suit me very well for a meeting.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark37>>207    for: purpose and cause

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark38>>1    people's purposes: / went for an
interview

For can be used to talk about somebody's purpose in doing something, but
only when it is followed by a noun.

We stopped at the pub for a drink.

I went to the college for an interview with Professor Taylor.

For is not used before a verb in this sense. The infinitive alone is
used to express a person's purpose (see 289).

We stopped at the pub to have a drink, (not ... for having a drink on
for to have a drink)

I went to the college to see Professor Taylor. (not ... for seeing
Professor Taylor.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark39>>2    the purposes of things: -ing forms and
infinitives

For can be used before the -ing form of a verb to express the ‘purpose'
of a thing - what it is used for - especially when the thing is the
subject.

Is that cake for eating or just for looking at?

An altimeter is used for measuring height above sea level When the
clause has a person as subject, an infinitive is often used to express
the purpose of a thing.

We use altimeters to measure height above sea level

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark40>>3    causes of reactions

For.. .ing can also be used after a description of a positive or
negative reaction, to explain the behaviour that caused it.

We are grateful to you for helping us out.

Tm angry with you for waking me up.

They punished the child for lying.

He was sent to prison for stealing.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark41>>208 for, since, in and from: time

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark42>>1    for

We use for for duration - to say how long something lasts. for + period
of time

I studied the guitar for three years at school That house has been empty
for six months.

We go away for three weeks every summer.

My boss will be in Italy for the next ten days.

To measure duration up to the present, we use a present perfect tense
(see 460), not a present tense.

Vve known her for a long time. (not I know her for a long time.)

We've lived here for 20 years. (not Wc-live here for 20 years.)

A present tense with for refers to duration into the future. Compare:

How long are you here far? (= Until when ...?)

How long have you been here for? (= Since when ...?)

We can often leave out for in an informal style, especially with How
long...? And for is not usually used before all How long have you been
waiting (for)?

We've been here (for) six weeks. I've had a headache all day

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark43>>2    for and since with perfect tenses: the
difference

For and since can both be used with a present perfect to talk about
duration up to the present. They are not the same. Compare:

for + period

I've known her for three days, (not ... since three days.)

It's been raining for weeks.

since + starting point

I've known her since Tuesday.

It's been raining since the beginning of the month.

With a past perfect, for and since refer to duration up to a particular
past moment.

She'd been working therefor a long time. (not .. .-since a long time.)

She'd been working there since 1988.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark44>>3    in after negatives and superlatives
(AmE)

After negatives and superlatives, in can be used to talk about duration.
This is especially common in American English.

I haven't seen him for/in months.

It was the worst storm for/in ten years.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark45>>4    from and since

From and since give the starting points of actions, events or states:
they say when things begin or began.

from/since + starting point

I'll be here from three o'clock onwards.

/ work from nine to five.

From now on, Vm going to go running every day.

From his earliest childhood he loved music.

Vve been waiting since six o'clock.

Vve known her since January.

We use since (with a perfect tense) especially when we measure duration
from a starting point up to the present, or up to a past time that we
are talking about.

Vve been working since six o'clock, and Vm getting tired, (not Vve been
working from six o'clock...)

I had been working since six o'clock, and I was getting tired.

From is used in other cases.

The shop was open from eight in the morning, but the boss didn't arrive
till ten. (not The shop was open since eight...)

I'll be at home from Tuesday morning (on), (not ... since-Tuesday
morning.)

From is sometimes possible with a present perfect, especially in
expressions that mean ‘right from the start'.

She's been like that from her childhood, (or ... since her childhood.)
From/Since the moment they were married, they've quarrelled.

From/Since the dawn of civilisation, people have made war.

For Jrom ...to and from ... until, see 602.

For more about tenses with since, see 522.

For since meaning ‘as' or 'because', see 72.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark46>>209    forget and leave

We can use forget to talk about accidentally leaving things behind.

Oh damn! Vve forgotten my umbrella.

However, we normally use leave if we mention the place.

Oh damn! Vve left my umbrella at home, (not Vve forgotten my umbrella at
heme.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark47>>210    fun and funny

Fun is normally an uncountable noun. It can be used after be to say that
things or people are enjoyable or entertaining.

The party was Jun, wasn't it? (not The party was funny.)

Anne and Eric are a lot of Jun.

In informal English, fun can also be used as an adjective before a noun.

That was a real Jim party.

Funny is an adjective, and is used to say that something makes you
laugh.

Why are you wearing that funny hat?

Note that funny has another meaning: ‘strange', ‘peculiar'.

A funny thing happened. \^ Do you mean funny ha-ha or funny peculiar?

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark48>>211 future (1): introduction

There are several ways to use verbs to talk about the future in English.
This is a complicated area of grammar: the differences between the
meanings and uses of the different structures are not easy to analyse
and describe clearly. In many, but not all situations, two or more
structures are possible with similar meanings.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark49>>1    will/shall

When we are simply giving information about the future, or talking about
possible future events which are not already decided or obviously on the
way, we usually use wiU (or I/we shall) + infinitive. This is the most
common way of talking about the future. For details, see 212.

Nobody wiU ever know what happened to her.

I think Liverpool will win.    I shall probably be home late tonight.

Will and shall are also used to express our intentions and attitudes
towards other people: they are common in offers, requests, threats,
promises and announcements of decisions. For details, see 217.

Shall I carry your bag?    I'll hit you if you do that again.

VII phone you tonight.

You can have it for half price. ~ OK I'll buy it.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark50>>2    present forms: I'm leaving; I'm going
to leave

When we talk about future events which have some present reality - which
have already been planned or decided, or which we can see are on the way
-we often use present forms. The present progressive is common. For
details, see 214.

I^{f}m seeing John tomorrow.    What are you doing this evening?

The present progressive of go (be going to...) is often used as an
auxiliary verb to talk about the future. For details, see 213.

Sandra is going to have another baby.

When are you going to get a Job?

These present forms are especially common in speech (because
conversation is often about future events which are already planned, or
which we can see are on the way).

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark51>>3    simple present: the train leaves ...

The simple present can also be used to talk about the future, but only
in certain situations. For details, see 215.

The train leaves at half past six tomorrow morning.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark52>>4    other ways of talking about the future

We can use the future perfect to say that something will be completed,
finished or achieved by a certain time. For details, see 219.

By next Christmas we'll have been here for eight years.

The future progressive can be used to say that something will be in
progress at a particular time. For details, and other uses of this
tense, see 220.

This time tomorrow I'll be lying on the beach.

Be about + infinitive (see 5) suggests that a future event is very
close.

The plane's about to take off. Is your seat belt done up?

Be + infinitive is used to talk about plans, arrangements and schedules,
and to give instructions. For details, see 91.

The President is to visit Beijing in January.

You're not to tell anybody about this.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark53>>5    'future in the past^{7}

To say that something was still in the future at a certain past time, we
can use a past form of one of the future structures. For details, see
221.

Something was going to happen that was to change the world.

I knew she would arrive before long.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark54>>6    subordinate clauses

In many subordinate clauses we refer to the future with present tenses
instead of shall/will + infinitive. For details, see 580.

Phone me when you have time. (not ... when you'll have time.)

Til think of you when I'm lying on the beach next week.

(not ... when I'll be lying on the beach ...)

Ill follow him wherever he goes, (not ... ■ wherever -ke'H-go.)

You can have anything I find, (not ... anything III find.)

212 future (2): will/shall

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark55>>(information and prediction)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark56>>1    forms

will + infinitive without to

It will be cold tomorrow.

Where will you spend the night?

Some British people use I shall and we shall instead of I/we will_{f}
with no difference of meaning in most situations. (For cases where there
is a difference, see 217.) Shall is unusual in American English in most
situations (but see 217).

Contractions: III, you'll etc; shan't /Joint/ (BrE only), won't /waunt/

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark57>>2    use: giving information about the
future; predicting

Will (or shall) + infinitive is used to give (or ask for) information
about the future.

It'll be spring soon. Will all the family be at the wedding?

We shall need the money on the 15th.

Karen will start work some time next week.

In another thirteen minutes the alarm will go off. This wUl close an
electrical contact, causing the explosive to detonate.

We often use will/shall in predictions of future events - to talk about
what we think, guess or calculate will happen.

Tomorrow will be warm, with some cloud in the afternoon.

Who do you think will win on Saturday?

I shall be rich one day. You'll never finish that book.    ►

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark58>>3    conditional use

Will/shall is often used to express conditional ideas, when we say what
will happen something else happens.

He'll have an accident if he goes on driving like that If the weather's
fine, we'll have the party in the garden.

Look out - you 11 fall! (If you're not more careful.)

Come out for a drink. - No, I'll miss the film on TV if I do.

Don't leave me. I'll cry!

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark59>>4    future events already decided: will not
used

When future events are already decided, or when we can ‘see them
coming', we often prefer a present form (usually present progressive or
going to ...). I'm seeing the headmaster on Monday. My sister's going to
have a baby.

For details, see 213, 214 and 216.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark60>>5    not used in subordinate clauses: when I
arrive

In subordinate clauses, we usually use present tenses instead of
will/shall (see 580.2).

I'll phone you when I arrive, (not ... when I will arrive.)

For exceptions, see 580.4,8, 260.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark61>>6    other uses of will and shall

Will and shall are not only used to give and ask for information about
the future. They can also be used to express 'interpersonal' meanings
such as requests, offers, orders, threats and promises. For details, see
217.

Shall I open a window?    I'U break his neck!

Will you get here at nine tomorrow, please?

For information about all uses of will, see 629.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark62>>213 future (3): going to ...

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark63>>1    a present tense

This structure is really a present tense (the present progressive of
go).

We use it to talk about future actions and events that have some present
reality. If we say that something in the future is going to happen, it
is usually already planned or decided, or it is starting to happen, or
we can see it coming now. The structure is very common in an informal
style, especially in speech (because conversation is often about future
actions and events of this kind).

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark64>>2    plans: We're going to get a new car

We use be going* infinitive to talk about plans, especially in an
informal style. This structure often emphasises the idea of intention,
or a decision that has already been made.

We're going to get a new car soon John says he's going to phone this
evening.

When are you going to get your hair cut?

I'm going to keep asking her out until she says 'Yes'.

I'm going to stop him reading my letters if it's the last thing I do.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark65>>3    things that are on the way: She's going
to have a baby

Another use of the going-to structure is to predict the future on the
basis of present evidence - to say that a future action or event is on
the way, or starting to happen.

Sandra's going to have another baby in June.

Look at the sky. It's going to rain. Look out! We're going to crash!

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark66>>4    commands and refusals

Going to ... can be used to insist that people do things or do not do
things. You're going to finish that soup if you sit there all afternoon!

She's going to take that medicine whether she likes it or not!

You're not going to play football in my garden.

It is also used in emphatic refusals.

I'm not going to sit up all night listening to your problems!

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark67>>5    gonna

In informal speech, going to is often pronounced /gana/. This is
sometimes shown in writing as gonna, especially in American English.

Nobody's gonna talk to me like that.

For was going to, has been going to ctc, see 221.

For going to ... compared with the present progressive, see 214.2.

For a comparison with will, see 216.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark68>>214 future (4): present progressive

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark69>>1 present reality: I'm washing my hair this
evening

We use the present progressive for future actions and events that have
some present reality. It is most common in discussions of personal
arrangements and fixed plans, when the time and place have been decided.

What are you doing this evening?~ I'm washing my hair.

I'm seeing Larry on Saturday.

We're travelling round Mexico next summer.

Did you know I'm getting a new job?

What are we having for dinner?

My car's going in for a service next week.

We often use the present progressive with verbs of movement, to talk
about actions which are just starting.

Are you coming to the pub?

I'm just popping out to the post office. Back in a minute.

Get your coat on! I'm taking you down to the doctor!

Note that the simple present is not often used to talk about the future
(see 215).

What are you doing this evening? (not What do you do this evening?) »

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark70>>2    present progressive and going to :
differences

In many cases, both structures can be used to express the same idea.

Vm washing / going to wash my hair this evening.

But there are some differences. For example, we prefer going to ... when
we are talking not about fixed arrangements, but about intentions and
decisions. Compare:

-    Vm seeing Phil tonight, (emphasis on arrangement)

Vm really going to tell him what I think of him, (emphasis on intention:
not I'm really telling him ...)

-    Who's cooking lunch? (asking what has been arranged)

Who's going to cook lunch? (asking for a decision)

Because the present progressive is used especially for personal
arrangements, it is not generally used to make predictions about events
that are outside people's control.

It's going to snow before long. (not It's snowing before long.)

I can see that things are going to get better soon. (not ... thingsttre
getting better-seen:)

And the present progressive is used for actions and events, but not
usually for permanent states. Compare:

Our house is getting / is going to get new windows this winter.

Their new house is going to look over the river, (not Their new house is
looking over- the -river.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark71>>3    commands and refusals

The present progressive can be used to insist that people do things or
do not do things.

You're finishing that soup if you sit there all afternoon!

She's taking that medicine whether she likes it or not!

You're not wearing that skirt to school The present progressive is
common in emphatic refusals.

Vm sorry, you're not taking my car.

Vm not washing your socks - forget it!

For a comparison with will, see 216.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark72>>215 future (5): simple present

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark73>>1 timetables etc: The summer term starts...

We can sometimes use the simple present to talk about the future. This
is common when we are talking about events which are part of a
timetable, a regular schedule or something similar.

The summer term starts on April 10th.

What time does the bus arrive in Seattle?

My plane leaves at three o'clock.

Are you on duty next weekend?

The sun rises at 6.13 tomorrow.

Will is also usually possible in these cases.

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark74>>2    subordinate clauses: when she gets a
job

The simple present is often used with a future meaning in subordinate
clauses

-    for example after what, where, when, until, if, than. For details,
see 580.

Ill tell you what I find out. (not ... what I'll find out)

She'll pay us back when she gets a job. (not .. .-when-shell get a job.)

Alex will see us tomorrow if he has time. (not ... if-he
will-have-time:)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark75>>3    instructions: Where do I pay?

Occasionally the simple present is used with a future meaning when
asking for and giving instructions.

Where do I pay? Well, what do we do now?

So when you get to London you go straight to Victoria Station, you meet
up with the others, Ramona gives you your ticket, and you catch the
17.15 train for Dover. OK?

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark76>>4    other cases

In other cases, we do not usually use the simple present to talk about
the future.

Lucy's coming for a drink this evening, (not Lucy comes...)

I promise W phone you this evening; (not I-promise-I-pkone-yott-this
evening.)

There's the doorbell ~ I'll go. (not ... I go.)

<<main-13.xhtml#bookmark77>>216 future (6): present forms or will?

Will is the ‘basic* structure for talking about the future. We use will
if there is not a good reason for using present forms.

<<main-14.xhtml>>

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark0>>1    present reality

We prefer present forms (present progressive or going to ...) when we
are talking about future events that have some present reality (see
213-214). In other cases we use will Compare:

-    I'm seeing Janet on Tuesday. (The arrangement exists now.)

I wonder if shell recognise me. (not talking about the present)

-    We're going to get a new car. (The decision already exists.)

I hope it will be better than the last one. (not talking about the
present)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark1>>2    predictions: thinking and guessing about
the future

In predictions, we use going to when we have outside evidence for what
we say

-    for example black clouds in the sky, a person who is obviously
about to fall.

See those clouds? It's going to rain, (not See those clouds? It will
rain.)

Look - that kid's going to fall off his bike, (not Look! That kid'll
fall off his

\

We prefer will for predictions when there is not such obvious outside
evidence

-    when we are talking more about what is inside our heads: what we
know, or believe, or have calculated. (When we use will, we are not
showing the listener something; we are asking him or her to believe
something.) Compare: ►

-    Look out - we're going to crash! (There is outside evidence.)

Don't lend him your car. He's a terrible driver - he'll crash it (the
speaker's knowledge)

-    I've just heard from the builder. That roof repair's going to cost
£7,000.

(outside evidence - the builder's letter)

I reckon it'll cost about £3,000 to put in new lights. (the speaker's
opinion)

-    Alice is going to have a baby. (outside evidence - she is pregnant
now)

The baby will certainly have blue eyes, because both parents have.
(speaker's

knowledge about genetics)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark2>>217 future (7): will and shall (interpersonal
uses)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark3>>1    differences between will and shall

Will and shall are not only used for giving information about the
future. They are also common in offers, promises, orders and similar
kinds of ‘interpersonal* language use. In these cases, will (or 70
generally expresses willingness or wishes (this is connected with an
older use of will to mean ‘wish^{1} or ‘want'). Shall expresses
obligation (like a more direct form of should).

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    announcing decisions: will

We often use will when we tell people about a decision as we make it,
for instance if we are agreeing to do something.

OK. We'll buy the tickets. You can buy supper after the show.

The phone's ringing. * I'll answer it (not I'm going to answer it)
Remember to phone Joe, won't you?* Yes, I will Shall is not used in this
way.

You can have it for £50.* OK. I'll buy it (not .. .-hshalbbuy-it)

Note that the simple present is not normally used to announce decisions.

I think I'll go to bed. (not f think I go to bed.)

There's the doorbell* I'll go. (not ... I go.)

To announce decisions that have already been made, we generally prefer
going to ... or the present progressive (see 213-214).

Well, we've agreed on a price, and I'm going to buy it.

I've made my decision and I'm sticking to it Stressed will can express
determination.

I will stop smoking! I really wiU!

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    promises and threats: will

We often use will/'ll in promises and threats. Note that the simple
present is not possible in these cases.

I promise I won't smoke again. (not {-promise I don't smoke ...)

I'll phone you tonight (not I-phone...)

I'U hit you if you do that again. You'll suffer for this!

Shall is also possible in British English after / and we, but it is less
common than will

I shall give you a teddy bear for your birthday.

In older English, shall was often used with second and third person
subjects in promises and threats. This is now very unusual.

You shall have all you wish for. He shall regret this.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark6>>4    refusals: won't

Will not or won't is used to refuse, or to talk about refusals.

I don't care what you say, I won't do it.

The car won't start.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark7>>5    asking for instructions and decisions:
shall

Questions with shall I/we are used (in both British and American
English) to ask for instructions or decisions, to offer services, and to
make suggestions. Will is not used in this way.

Shall I open a window? (not Will I open a window?)

Shall I carry your bag?

What time shall we come and see you?

What on earth shall we do?

Shall we go out for a meal?

Lets go and see Lucy, shall we?

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark8>>6    giving instructions and orders: will

We can use Will you... ? to tell or ask people to do things. (In polite
requests, Would you ... ? is preferred - see 633.5.)

Will you get me a newspaper when you're out?

Will you be quiet, please/ Make me a cup of coffee, will you?

For reporting of interpersonal shall in indirect speech, see 278.4.

218 future (8): will/shall, going to and

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark9>>present progressive (advanced points)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark10>>1 will/shall and present forms: both
possible

The differences between the structures used to talk about the future are
not always very clear-cut. Will/shall and present forms (especially
going to...) are often both possible in the same situation, if ‘present'
ideas like intention or fixed arrangement are a part of the meaning, but
not very important. The choice can depend on which aspect we wish to
emphasise.

-    What wiU you do next year? (open question about the future; perhaps
no

clear plans have been made)

What are you doing next year? (emphasis on fixed arrangements)

What are you going to do next year? (emphasis on intentions)

-    All the family wiU be there.

All the family are going to be there.

-    If your mother comes, you'll have to help with the cooking.

If your mother comes, you're going to have to help with the cooking. ►

-    You won't believe this.

You're not going to believe this.

-    Next year will be different.

Next year is going to be different.

-    John will explain everything to you.

John's going to explain everything to you.

Both going to ... (see 213) and stressed will (see 217.2) can express a
strong intention or determination.

I'm really going to stop smoking! I really will stop smoking!

In cases like these, the different forms are all correct, and it is
unimportant which one is chosen.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    official arrangements

Will is often used, rather than present forms, in giving information
about impersonal, fixed arrangements - for example official itineraries.
Compare: We're meeting Sandra at 6.00.

The Princess will arrive at the airport at 14.00. She will meet the
President at 14.30, and will then attend a performance of traditional
dances.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark12>>3    predictions as orders

Predictions can be used as a way of giving orders - instead of telling
somebody to do something, the speaker just says firmly that it will
happen. This is common in military-style orders.

The regiment will attack at dawn.

You will start work at six o'clock sharp.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark13>>4    different meanings of will you ...?

With a verb referring to a state, will you ...? asks for information.

How soon will you know your holiday dates?

Will you be here next week?

With a verb referring to an action, will you...? usually introduces an
order or request (see 217.6).

Will you turn off that music!

Will you do the shopping this afternoon, please?

To ask for information about planned actions, we use a present form (see
213-214) or the future progressive (see 220).

When are you going to see Andy?

Are you doing the shopping this afternoon?

Will you be doing the shopping...?

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark14>>5    expressing certainty about the present
or past

We can use will to talk about the present - to say what we think is
probably or certainly the case.

There's somebody at the door. ~ That'll be the postman.

Don't phone them now - they'll be having dinner.

Will have... can express similar ideas about the past.

As you will have noticed, there is a new secretary in the front office.

It's no use expecting Barry to turn up. He'll have forgotten.

For more about this and other uses of will, see 629.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark15>>6 obligation: shall

In contracts and other legal documents, shall is often used with
third-person subjects to refer to obligations and duties.

The hirer shall be responsible for maintenance of the vehicle.

In normal usage, we prefer will, must or should to express ideas of this
kind.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark16>>219    future (9): future perfect (they will
have finished)

will have + past participle

We can use the future perfect to say that something will be finished or
complete by a certain time in the future.

The builders say they will have finished the roof by Tuesday.

I'll have spent all my holiday money by the end of the week.

Shall can be used instead of will after / and we (see 212.1).

I shall have spent...

A progressive form can be used to talk about a continuous activity.

Ill have been teaching for twenty years this summer.

For will have... used to express certainty about the past (e.g. It's no
use phoning - he'll have left by now), see 218.5, 629.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark17>>220    future (10): future progressive

shall/will + be + .. .ing

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark18>>1    events in progress in the future

We can use the future progressive to say that something will be in
progress (going on) at a particular moment in the future.

This time tomorrow Fll be lying on the beach.

Good luck with the exam. We'll be thinking of you.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark19>>2    events that are fixed or expected to
happen

The future progressive is also used (without a progressive meaning) to
refer to future events which are fixed or decided, or which are expected
to happen in the normal course of events.

Professor Baxter wiU be giving another lecture on Roman glass-making at
the same time next week.

Fll be seeing you one of these days, I expect.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark20>>3    no idea of making decisions

The future progressive is useful if we want to show that we are not
talking about making decisions, but about things that will happen
‘anyway*.

Shall I pick up the laundry for you?* Oh, no, don't make a special
journey. *It*s OK. I'U be going to the shops anyway.    ►

The tense can be used to make polite enquiries about people's plans. (By
using the future progressive to ask ‘What have you already decided?*,
the speaker shows that he/she does not want to influence the listener's
intentions.) Compare:

Will you be staying in this evening? (very polite enquiry, suggesting ‘I
simply want to know your plans')

Are you going to stay in this evening? (pressing for a decision)

This usage is possible with verbs that do not normally have progressive
forms (see 471).

WiU you be wanting lunch tomorrow?

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark21>>4 progressive form with going to

A progressive form of the going to structure is also possible.

Vm going to be working all day tomorrow, so I won't have time to shop.

For will be.. .ing used to express certainty about the present (e.g.
Don't phone now - they'll be having lunch), see 218.5, 629.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark22>>221    future (11): future in the past

Sometimes when we are talking about the past, we want to talk about
something which was in the future at that time - which had not yet
happened. To express this idea, we use the structures that are normally
used to talk about the future (see 211-220), but we make the verb forms
past. For example, instead of is going to we use was going to; instead
of the present progressive we use the past progressive: instead of will
we use would; instead of is to we use was to.

Last time I saw you, you were going to start a new job.

I had no time to shop because I was leaving for Germany in two hours.

In 19881 arrived in the town where I would spend ten years of my life.

I went to have a look at the room where I was to talk that afternoon.
Perfect forms of be going to are also possible.

I've been going to write to you for ages, but Vve only just found time.

For was to have + past participle (e.g. She was to have taken over my
job, but she jell ill), see 91.1.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark23>>222    gender (references to males and
females)

English does not have many problems of grammatical gender. Usually,
people are he or she and things are it. Note the following points.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark24>>1 animals, cars, ships and countries

People sometimes call animals he or she, especially when they are
thought of as having personality, intelligence or feelings. This is
common with pets and domestic animals like cats, dogs and horses.

Once upon a time there was a rabbit called Joe. He lived...

Go and find the cat and put her out.

In these cases, who is often used instead of which.

She had an old dog who always slept in her bed

Some people use she for cars, motorbikes etc; sailors often use she for
boats and ships (but most other people use it).

How's your new car?~~ Terrific. She's running beautifully.

The ship's struck a rock. She's sinking!

We can use she for countries, but it is more common in modem English.
France has decided to increase its trade with Romania.

(or ... her trade...)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    he or she

Traditionally, English has used he/him/his when the sex of a person is
not known, or in references that can apply to either men or women,
especially in a formal style.

If a student is ill, he must send his medical certificate to the College
office. If I ever find the person who did that, I'll kill him.

Many people now regard such usage as sexist and try to avoid it. He or
she, him or her and his or her are common.

If a student is ill, he or she must send a medical certificate...

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark26>>3    unisex they

In an informal style, we often use they to mean ‘he or she', especially
after indefinite words like somebody, anybody, nobody, person. This
usage is sometimes considered ‘incorrect*, but it has been common in
educated speech for centuries. For details, see 528.

If anybody wants my ticket, they can have it There's somebody at the
door. ~ Tell them I'm out When a person gets married, they have to start
thinking about their responsibilities.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark27>>4    actor and actress etc

A few jobs and positions have different words for men and women.
Examples:

| Man            | Woman        | Man         | Woman         |
| actor          | actress      | monk        | nun           |
| (bride)groom   | bride        | policeman   | policewoman   |
| duke           | duchess      | prince      | princess      |
| hero           | heroine      | steward     | stewardess    |
| host           | hostess      | waiter      | waitress      |
| manager        | manageress   | widower     | widow         |

A mayor can be a man or a woman; in Britain a mayoress is the wife of a
male mayor.

Some words ending in -ess (e.g. authoress, poetess) have gone out of use
(author and poet are now used for both men and women). The same thing is
happening to actress and manageress. Steward and stewardess are being
replaced by other terms such as flight attendant, and police officer is
often used instead of policeman! woman.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark28>>5 words ending in -man

Some words ending in -man do not have a common feminine equivalent (e.g.
chairman, fireman, spokesman). As many women dislike being called, for
example, ‘chairman* or ‘spokesman*, these words are now often avoided in

references to women or in general references to people of either sex. In
many cases, -person is now used instead of -man.

Alice has just been elected chairperson (or chair) of our committee.

A spokesperson said that the Minister does not intend to resign.

In some cases, new words ending in -woman (e.g. spokeswoman) are coming
into use. But there is also a move to choose words, even for men, which
are not gender-marked (e.g. supervisor instead of foreman, ambulance
staff instead of ambulance men, firefighter instead of fireman).

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark29>>6    man

Man and mankind have traditionally been used for the human race.

Why does man have more diseases than animals?

That's one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind.

(Neil Armstrong, on stepping onto the moon)

Some people find this usage sexist, and prefer terms such as people,
humanity or the human race. Note also the common use of synthetic
instead of man-made.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark30>>7    titles

Ms (pronounced /miz/ or /mez/) is often used instead of Mrs or Miss.
Like Mr, it does not show whether the person referred to is married or
not.

For more information about names and titles, see 363.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark31>>223 get (1): basic structures

Get is one of the commonest words in English, and is used in many
different ways. It is sometimes avoided in a very formal style, but it
is correct and natural in most kinds of speech and writing. The meaning
of get depends on what kind of word comes after it. With a direct
object, the basic meaning is 'obtain', ‘come to have'; with other kinds
of word, the basic meaning is ‘become', ‘come to be'.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark32>>1 get + noun/pronoun: I got a letter

With a direct object (noun or pronoun), get usually means ‘receive',
‘fetch', ‘obtain', ‘catch' or something similar. The exact meaning
depends on the object.

I got a letter from Lucy this morning.

Can you come and get me from the station when I arrive?

If I listen to loud music I get a headache.

If you get a number 6 bus, it stops right outside our house.

Get can be used with two objects (see 610).

Let me get you a drink.

Other meanings are sometimes possible.

I didn't get the joke. (= understand)

I'll get you for this, you bastard. (= punish, make suffer)

Get + noun is not normally used to mean 'become*. To express this
meaning, we can use get to be* noun (see paragraph 6 below).

Wayne's getting to be a lovely kid. (not Wayne's getting a-bvely kid.)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark33>>2    get + adjective: getting old

Before an adjective, get usually means ‘become'.

As you get old, your memory gets worse.

My feet are getting cold.

With object + adjective, the meaning is ‘make somebody/something
become'. It's time to get the kids ready for school.

I can't get my hands warm.

We must get the house clean before Mother arrives.

For go + adjective [go green, go blind etc), and the differences between
get, go, become, turn etc, see 128.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark34>>3    get + adverb particle or preposition:
get out

Before an adverb particle (like up, away, out) or a preposition, get
nearly always refers to a movement of some kind. (For the difference
between get and go, see 225.)

I often get up at five o'clock,

I went to see him, but he told me to get out Would you mind getting off
my foot?

In some idioms the meaning is different - e.g. get to a place (= arrive
at...); get over something (= recover from); get on with somebody (=
have a good relationship with).

With an object, the structure usually means ‘make somebody/something
move'.

You can't get him out of bed in the morning.

Would you mind getting your papers off my desk?

Have you ever tried to get toothpaste back into the tube?

The car's OK - it gets me from A to B.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark35>>4    get + past participle: get washed,
dressed, married etc

Get can be used with a past participle. This structure often has a
reflexive meaning, to talk about things that we ‘do to ourselves'.
Common expressions are get washed, get dressed, get lost, get drowned,
get engagedlmarriecUdivorced. You've got five minutes to get dressed
She's getting married in June.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark36>>5    passive auxiliary: He got caught

Get + past participle is also used to make passive structures, in the
same way as be + past participle.

My watch got broken while I was playing with the children.

He got caught by the police driving at 120 mph.

I get paid on Fridays. I never get invited to parties.

This structure is mostly used in an informal style, and it is not often
used to talk about longer, more deliberate, planned actions.

Our house was built in 1827. (not Our house got built in 1827.)
Parliament was opened on Thursday, (not Parliament got opened...) *

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark37>>6    get.. .ing; get + infinitive

Get.. .mg is sometimes used informally to mean ‘start.. .ing*,
especially in the expressions get moving, get going.

We'd better get moving - it's late.

With an infinitive, get can mean ‘manage*, ‘have an opportunity* or ‘be
allowed*. We didn't get to see her - she was too busy.

When do I get to meet your new boyfriend?

Get + infinitive can also suggest gradual development.

He's nice when you get to know him.

You'll get to speak English more easily as time goes by Wayne's getting
to be a lovely kid.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark38>>7    got and gotten

In British English the past participle of get is got In American English
the past participle is gotten (e.g. You've gotten us in a lot of
trouble.) except in the structure have got (see 237).

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark39>>224 get (2): + object + verb form

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark40>>1    causative: Don't get him talking

Get + object + ...ing means ‘make somebody/something start.. .ing*.

Don't get him talking about his illnesses.

Once we got the heater going the car started to warm up.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark41>>2    causative: Get Penny to help us

Get + object + infinitive means ‘make somebody/something do something'
or ‘persuade somebody/something to do something*: there is often an idea
of difficulty.

I can't get that child to go to bed.

Get Penny to help us if you can. See if you can get the car to start.
For have + object + infinitive (meaning 'order/instruct somebody to do
something'), see 238.1.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark42>>3    causative: get something done

Get + object + past participle can mean ‘cause something to be done by
somebody else*. The past participle has a passive meaning.

I must get my watch repaired. (= I want my watch to be repaired.)

I'm going to get my hair cut this afternoon.

Have is used in a similar structure: see 238.2.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark43>>4    experience: We got our roof blown off

Get + object + past participle can sometimes be used in the sense of
‘experience*.

We got our roof blown off in the storm last week This idea is more often
expressed with have (e.g. We had our roof blown off.)

- see 238.3.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark44>>5 Get the children dressed

We can also use get + object + past participle to talk about completing
work on something.

It will take me another hour to get the washing done.

After you've got the children dressed, can you make the beds?

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark45>>225    get and go: movement

Go is used to talk about a whole movement.

Get is used when we are thinking mainly about the end of a movement -the
arrival. Compare:

-    I go to work by car and Lucy goes by train.

I usually get there first.

-    I went to a meeting in Bristol yesterday.

I got to the meeting at about eight o'clock.

We often use get to suggest that there is some difficulty in arriving.

It wasn't easy to get through the crowd.

I don't know how we're going to get over the river,

Can you tell me how to get to the police station?

For get and go meaning 'become*, see 128.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark46>>226    give with action-nouns

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    give a cough, etc

We can replace certain verbs by a structure with give and a noun. This
often happens in BrE, for example, with verbs referring to sounds made
by people (e.g. cough, cry, scream, chuckle, laugh, shout).

He gave a cough to attract my attention.

Suddenly she gave a bud scream and fell to the ground.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    give somebody a smile, etc

The structure is also used with an indirect object (in both BrE and AmE)
to

replace transitive verbs, especially in an informal style. Common
expressions:

give somebody a smile, a look_{t} a kiss, a hug, a ring (BrE = a phone
call)

give something a push, a kick

give it a try, a go (BrE = a try), a shot (AmE = a try)

give it a miss (BrE)

not give it a thought

She gave me a strange look.

I'll give you a ring if I hear anything.

If the car won't start, we'll give it a push

Perhaps salt will make it taste better. ~ OK, let's give it a try.

Are you coming to the film? ~ No, I'm tired, I'U give it a miss, (BrE)

He seemed to be in a bad temper, but I didn't give it a thought.

For taboo expressions like J don't give a damn/shit etc, see 575.

For other structures in which nouns replace verbs, see 598.

For more about structures with give, see 610.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark49>>227    go/come for a ...

We can use the structure golcome for a... in some fixed expressions
referring to actions, mostly leisure activities. Using this structure
makes the action sound casual and probably rather short. (Compare go ..
.ing- see 228.) Common examples:

golcome for a walk, a run, a swim, a ride, a drive, a drink, a meal go
for a bath, a shower, a pee/piss (taboo - see 575).

We need some fresh air. Let's go for a walk.

Would you like to come for a drink this evening?

Vm going for a shower Can you answer my phone if it rings?

This structure is only used with certain action-nouns - we would
probably not say, for example, Come for a ski with us or Vm going for a
read.

For other structures in which nouns are used to refer to actions, see
598.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark50>>228    go/come ...ing

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark51>>1    go ,ing

We use go with an -ing form to talk about activities in which people
move about, and which do not have a fixed beginning or end. The
structure is common in expressions referring to sport and leisure
activities - for example go climbing, go dancing, go fishing, go
hunting, go riding, go sailing, go shooting, go skating, go skiing, go
swimming, go walking.

Let's go climbing next weekend.

Did you go dancing last Saturday?

Go .. .ing is also used to talk about looking for or collecting things.

I think I'll go shopping tomorrow.

In June all the students go looking for jobs.

Anne's going fruit-picking this weekend.

We do not use go .. Jng to talk about activities that have a more
definite beginning and end (not go boxing, go watching a football
match).

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark52>>2    come ... ing

Come...ing is also possible in certain situations (for the difference
between come and go, see 134).

Come swimming with us tomorrow.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark53>>3    prepositions

Note that prepositions of place, not direction, are used after
golcome...ing.

I went swimming in the river. (not 1 went swimming to-the-river.)

She went shopping at Harrods. (not ... to Harrods.)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark54>>229    gone with be

Gone can be used like an adjective after be, to say that somebody is
away, or that something has disappeared or that there is no more.

She's been gone for three hours - what do you think she's doing?

You can go out shopping, but don't be gone too long.

When I came back my car was gone. Is the butter all gone?

For been used as a past participlc of go or come, see 95.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark55>>230    had better

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark56>>1    meaning

We use had better to give strong advice, or to tell people what to do
(including ourselves).

You'd better turn that music down before your Dad gets angry It's seven
o'clock. I'd better put the meat in the oven.

Had better refers to the immediate future. It is more urgent than should
or ought. Compare:

I really outfit to go and see Fred one of these days. ~ Well, you'd
better do it soon - he's leaving for South Africa at the end of the
month.

Had better is not used in polite requests. Compare:

Could you help me, if you've got time? (request)

You'd better help me. If you don't, there'll be trouble, (order/threat)

Note that had better does not usually suggest that the action
recommended would be better than another one that is being considered -
there is no idea of comparison. The structure means ‘It would be good to
..not ‘It would be better to .. .\

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark57>>2    forms

Had better refers to the immediate future, but the form is always past
(have better is impossible). After had better we use the infinitive
without to.

It's late - you had better hurry up.

(not ... you have better...)

(not ... you had -better-hurrying t to hurry...)

We normally make the negative with had better not + infinitive.

You'd better not wake me up when you come in.

{You hadn't better wake me... is possible but very unusual.)

A negative interrogative form Hadn't... better...? is possible.

Hadn't we better tell him the truth?

Normal unemphatic short answer forms are as follows:

Shall I put my clothes away?~ You'd better!

He says he won't tell anybody. ~He'd better not.

Had is sometimes dropped in very informal speech.

You better go now. I better try again later.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark58>>231    half

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark59>>1    half (of)

We can use half or half of before a noun with a determiner (article,
possessive or demonstrative). We do not normally put a or the before
half in this case. She spends half (of) her time travelling, (not
Shespends a/the half,..)

I gave him half (of) a cheese pie to keep him quiet.

When half (of) is followed by a plural noun, the verb is plural.

Half (of) my friends live abroad. (not Half of myfriends-lives-...)

Of is not used in expressions of measurement and quantity.

I live half a mile from here. (not ... half of a mile...)

I just need half a loaf of bread, (not ... half of a loaf...)

We use half of before pronouns.

Did you like the books? ~ I've only read half of them.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark60>>2    no following noun

Half can be used without a following noun, if the meaning is clear.

I've bought some chocolate. You can have half, (not .. .-the half.r)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark61>>3    the half

We use the before half if we are saying which half we mean. Before a
noun, of is used in this case.

Would you like the big half or the small half?

I didn't like the second half of the film.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark62>>4    half a and a half

Half usually comes before the article aian_{t} but it is possible to put
it after in expressions of measurement.

Could I have half a pound of grapes? (or ... a half pound...)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark63>>5    one and a half

The expression one and a half is plural. Compare:

Vve been waiting for one and a half hours, (not ... one and-a -half
hour.) Vve been waiting for an hour and a half

For more information about numbers and counting expressions, see 389.

For half in clock times (e.g. half past two), see 579.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark64>>232    happen to ...

Happen can be used with a following infinitive to suggest that something
happens unexpectedly or by chance.

If you happen to see Joan, ask her to phone me.

One day I happened to get talking to a woman on a train, and she turned
out to be a cousin of my mother's.

In sentences with if or in case, the idea of by chance can be emphasised
by using should before happen.

Let me know if you should happen to need any help.

Vll take my swimming things, in case I should happen to find a pool
open.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark65>>233    hardly, scarcely and no sooner

These three expressions can be used (often with a past perfect tense -
see 423) to suggest that one thing happened very soon after another.
Note the sentence structure:

... hardly ... when/before ...

... scarcely ... when/before ...

...no sooner... than ...

I had hardly/scarcely closed my eyes when the phone rang.

She was hardly/scarcely inside the house before the kids started
screaming. I had no sooner closed the door than somebody knocked.

We no sooner sat down in the train than I felt sick.

In a formal or literary style, inverted word order is possible (see
302).

Hardly had I closed my eyes when I began to imagine fantastic shapes.

No sooner had she agreed to marry him than site started to have doubts.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark66>>234    have (1): introduction

Have is used in several different ways:

a as an auxiliary verb, to make perfect verb forms Have you heard about
Peter and Corinne?

I remembered his face, but I had forgotten his name.

b to talk about possession, relationships and other states They have
three cars.

Have you got any brothers or sisters?

Do you often have headaches?

c to talk about actions and experiences I'm going to have a bath.

We're having a party next weekend.

d with an infinitive, to talk about obligation (like must)

I had to work last Saturday.

e with object + verb form, to talk about causing or experiencing actions
and events

He soon had everybody laughing.

I must have my shoes repaired.

We had our car stolen last week.

For details of the different structures and meanings, see the following
sections.

For contractions {Vue, haven't etc), see 143.

For weak forms, see 616.

For had better + infinitive, see 230.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark67>>235    have (2): auxiliary verb

have + past participle

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark68>>1    perfect verb forms

We use have as an auxiliary verb with past participles, to make
‘perfect* verb forms.

You've heard about Peter and Corinne? (present perfect: see 455-460)

I realised that I had met him before, (past perfect: see 423-425J We'll
have been living here for two years next Sunday.

(future perfect: see 219)

Vd like to have lived in the eighteenth century.

(perfect infinitive: see 280)

Having been there before, he knew what to expect (perfect participle:
see 408.2aJ

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark69>>2    questions and negatives

Like all auxiliary verbs, have makes questions and negatives without do.

Have you heard the news? (not Do you have heard...?)

I haven't seen them, (not hdortrt-have seen them.)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark70>>3    progressive forms

There are no progressive forms of the auxiliary verb have.

I haven't seen her anywhere, (not Vm not having seen her anywhere.)

For contractions, see 143.

For weak forms, see 616.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark71>>236    have (3): actions

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark72>>1 meaning and typical expressions

We often use have + object to talk about actions and experiences,
especially in an informal style.

Let's have a drink.

Vm going to have a bath

I'll have a think (BrE) and let you know what I decide.

Have a good time.

In expressions like these, have can be the equivalent of ‘eat*, ‘drink',
‘enjoy^{1}, 'experience' or many other things - the exact meaning
depends on the following noun. Common expressions:

have breakfast / lunch / supper / dinner / tea / coffee / a drink / a
meal have a bath / a wash / a shave / a shower have a rest / a lie-down
/ a sleep / a dream

have a good time / a bad day / a nice evening / a day off/a holiday have
a good journey / flight / trip etc

have a talk / a chat / a word with somebody / a conversation / a
disagreement f a row / a quarrel / a fight

have a swim I a walk / a ride / a dance / a game of tennis etc have a
try I ago have a look

have a baby (= give birth)

have difficulty / trouble (in) ...ing

have an accident I an operation / a nervous breakdown

Note American English take a bath/showerlrestlswim/walk.

Have can also be used to mean ‘receive' (e.g. I've had a phone call from
Sue).

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark73>>2 grammar

In this structure, we make questions and negatives with do. Progressive
forms are possible. Contractions and weak forms of have are not used.

Did you have a good holiday? (not Had you a good holiday?)

What are you doing?*I'm having a bath I have lunch at 12.30 most days,
(not I've lunch ...)

For other common structures in which nouns are used to talk about
actions, see 598.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark74>>237 have (4): have (got) - possession,
relationships and other states

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark75>>1    meanings

We often use have to talk about states: possession, relationships,
illnesses, the characteristics of people and things, and similar ideas.

Her father has a flat in Westminster They hardly have enough money to
live on.

Do you have any brothers or sisters?

The Prime Minister had a bad cold.

My grandmother didn*t have a very nice personality.

Sometimes have simply expresses the fact of being in a particular
situation. She has a houseful of children this weekend.

I think we have mice.

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark76>>2    progressive forms not used

Progressive forms of have are not used for these meanings.

She has three brothers, (not She is having three-brothers.)

Do you have a headache? (not Are you having a headache?)

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark77>>3    questions and negatives with do

In American English and modern British English, questions and negatives
are commonly formed with do.

Does the house have a garden?

Her parents did not have very much money.    ►

<<main-14.xhtml#bookmark78>>4    shorter question and negative forms:
Have you ...?] she has not

Short question and negative forms (e.g. Have you ..she has not) were
common in older English. In modern English they are rather formal and
uncommon (except in a few fixed expressions like I haven't the faintest
idea). They are not normally used in American English.

-    Have you an appointment? (formal BrE only)

Do you have an appointment? (AmE/BrE)

-    Angela has not the charm of her older sisters, (formal BrE only)

Angela does not have the charm ... (AmE/BrE)

<<main-15.xhtml>>

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark0>>5    have got

In conversation and informal writing, we often use the double form have
got. I've got a new boyfriend. (More natural in speech than I have a new
boyfriend.)

Has your sister got a car? I haven't got your keys.

Note that have got means exactly the same as have in this case - it is a
present tense of have, not the present perfect of get

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark1>>6    have got (details)

Do is not used in questions and negatives with got Have you got a
headache? (not Do you have got...)

The flat hasn't got a proper bathroom. (not The flat -doesn 't have
got-...) Gof-forms of have are not used in short answers or tags.

Have you got a light?*No, I haven't (not No-H-haven't got)

Anne's got a bike, hasn't she?

Got-forms of have are less common in the past tense.

/ had flu last week, (not I had -got-flu..)

Did you have good teachers when you were at school?

Got is not generally used with infinitives, participles or -ing forms of
have. you cannot usually say to have got a headache or having got a
brother. The infinitive of have got is occasionally used after modal
verbs (e.g. She must have got a new boyfriend).

Have got is rather less common in American English, especially in
questions and negatives.

In very informal American speech, people may drop've (but not 'j) before
got ICve) got a problem.

Got- and do-forms may be mixed in American English, especially when
short answers, reply questions and tags follow go r-forms.

I've got a new apartment * You do?

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark2>>7    repetition: got not used

When we are talking about repeated or habitual states, gof-forms of have
are less often used. Compare:

-    I have / I've got toothache.

I often have toothache.

-    Do you have / Have you got time to go to London this weekend?

Do you ever have time to go to London?

-    Sorry, I don't have / haven't got any beer.

We don't usually have beer in the house.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark3>>8 repetition: a change in British English

Traditionally, do-forms of have were used in British English mostly to
express habit or repetition. Compare (BrE):

Do you often have meetings?

Have you (got) a meeting today?

In modern British English (which is heavily influenced by American
English), do-forms are common even when there is no idea of repetition.

Do you have time to go to the beach this weekend? (AmE / modern BrE)

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark4>>238 have (5): + object + verb form

Have can be followed by object + infinitive (without to), object + -ing,
and object + past participle.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark5>>1    causative: have somebody do/doing
something

Have + object + infinitive can mean 'cause somebody to do something'.
This is mostly used in American English, to talk about giving
instructions or orders. I'm ready to see Mr Smith. Have him come in,
please.

The manager had everybody fill out a form.

The structure with an -ing form can mean 'cause somebody to be doing
something' (BrE and AmE).

He had us laughing all through the meal.

For get + object + infinitive (meaning ‘persuade somebody/something to
do something'), see 224.2.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark6>>2    causative: have something done

Have + object + past participle can mean ‘cause something to be done by
somebody else'. The past participle has a passive meaning.

I must have my watch repaired. (= I want my watch to be repaired.)

Vm going to have my hair cut this afternoon.

If you don't get out of my house I'll have you arrested.

Get is used in a similar structure: see 224.3.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark7>>3    experience: have something
happen/happening

In the structure have + object + infinitive/.. .ing, have can mean
'experience'. I had a very strange thing happen to me when I was
fourteen.

We had a gipsy come to the door yesterday.

It's lovely to have children playing in the garden again.

I looked up and found we had water dripping through the ceiling:

Note the difference between the infinitive in the first two examples
(for things that happened), and the -ing form in the last two (for
things that are/were happening). This is like the difference between
simple and progressive tenses (see 461, 422).    »

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark8>>4    experience: We had our roof blown off

Have + object + past participle can also be used in the sense of
'experience*. Again, the past participle has a passive meaning.

We had our roof blown off in the storm.

King Charles had his head cut off

She's just had a short story published in a magazine.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark9>>5    I won't have...

I won't have + object + verb form can mean 'I won't allow ...'

I won't have you telling me what to do.

I won't have my house turned into a hotel.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark10>>239 have (6): have (got) to

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark11>>1    meaning: obligation, certainty

We can use have (got) + infinitive to talk about obligation: things that
it is necessary for us to do. The meaning is quite similar to must, for
the differences, see 361.1.

Sorry, I've got to go now.

Do you often have to travel on business?

Have (got) + infinitive can also be used, like must, to express
certainty. (This used to be mainly an American English structure, but it
is now becoming common in British English.)

I don't believe you. You have (got) to be joking.

Only five o'clock! It's got to be later than that!

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark12>>2    grammar: with or without do; got

In this structure, have can be used like an ordinary verb (with do in
questions and negatives), or like an auxiliary verb (without do). Got is
usually added to present-tense auxiliary-verb forms.

When do you have to be back? When have you (got) to be back?

Have got to is not normally used to talk about repeated obligation.

I usually have to be at work at eight (not I've usually got to...)
Progressive forms are possible to talk about temporary continued
obligation.

I'm having to work very hard at the moment.

For more details of the use of do-forms and gof-forms of have, see 237.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark13>>3    future: have (got) to or will have to

To talk about the future, we can use have (got) to if an obligation
exists now; we use will have to for a purely future obligation. Compare:

I've got to get up early tomorrow - we're going to Devon.

One day everybody wiU have to ask permission to buy a car Will have to
can be used to tell people what to do. It 'distances* the instructions,
making them sound less direct than must (see 361).

You can borrow my car, but you'll have to bring it back before ten.

For more about 'distancing', see 436.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark14>>4 pronunciation of have to; gotta

Have to is often pronounced /'haefta/.

He'll have to /'hsefta/ get a new passport soon.

Note the spelling gotta, sometimes used in informal American English
(for instance in cartoon strips) to show the conversational
pronunciation of got to. I gotta call home. A man's gotta do what a
man's gotta do.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark15>>240 headlines

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark16>>1    special language

Headlines are the short titles above news reports (e.g. RUSSIAN WOMAN
LANDS ON MOON). English news headlines can be very difficult to
understand. One reason for this is that headlines are often written in a
special style, which is very different from ordinary English. In this
style there are some special rules of grammar, and words are often used
in unusual ways.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark17>>2    grammar

a Headlines are not always complete sentences. Many headlines consist of
noun phrases with no verb.

MORE WAGE CUTS    HOLIDAY HOTEL DEATH

EXETER MAN'S DOUBLE MARRIAGE BID

b Headlines often contain strings of three, four or more nouns; nouns
earlier in the string modify those that follow.

FURNITURE FACTORY PAY CUT ROW Headlines like these can be difficult to
understand. It sometimes helps to read them backwards, furniture factory
pay cut row refers to a row (disagreement) about a CUT (reduction) in
pay at a FACTORY that makes FURNITURE.

c Headlines often leave out articles and the verb be.

SHAKESPEARE PLAY IMMORAL SAYS HEADMASTER SCHOOLBOY WALKS IN SPACE

d In headlines_{f} simple tenses are often used instead of progressive
or perfect forms. The simple present is used for both present and past
events.

BLIND GIRL CLIMBS EVEREST (= ... has climbed ...)

STUDENTS FIGHT FOR COURSE CHANGES (= ... are fighting ...)

The present progressive is used to talk about changes. Be is usually
dropped. BRITAIN GETTING WARMER, SAY SCIENTISTS TRADE FIGURES IMPROVING

e Many headline words are used as both nouns and verbs, and nouns are
often used to modify other nouns (see paragraph 2b). So it is not always
easy to work out the structure of a sentence. Compare:

US CUTS AID TO THIRD WORLD (= The US reduces its help ... CUTS is a
verb, aid is a noun.)    ►

aid cuts ROW (= There has been a disagreement about the reduction in
aid. aid and CUTS are both nouns.)

CUTS aid rebels (= The reduction is helping the revolutionaries. CUTS is
a noun, aid is a verb.)

f Headlines often use infinitives to refer to the future.

PM TO VISIT AUSTRALIA HOSPITALS TO TAKE FEWER PATIENTS For is also used
to refer to future movements or plans.

TROOPS FOR GLASGOW? (= Are soldiers going to be sent to Glasgow?)

g Auxiliary verbs are usually dropped from passive structures.

murder HUNT: MAN held (= ... a man is being held by police.) six killed
in explosion (= Six people have been killed ...)

Note that forms like held, attacked are usually past participles with
passive meanings, not past tenses (which are rare in headlines).
Compare:

-    aid ROW: president attacked (=... the President has been attacked.)

AID ROW: PRESIDENT ATTACKS CRITICS (= ... the President has attacked her
critics.)

-    BOY FOUND safe (= The missing boy has been found safe; he is safe.)
BOY FINDS safe (= A boy has found a safe.)

h As and in are often used instead of longer connecting expressions.

hospital boss axed as patients die (= ... because patients die.)

FOOTBALL MANAGER IN CAR CRASH

i A colon (:) is often used to separate the subject of a headline from
what is said about it.

STRIKES: PM TO ACT MOTORWAY CRASH: DEATH TOLL RISES Quotation marks
{*../) are used to show that words were said by somebody else, and that
the report does not necessarily claim that they are true.

CRASH DRIVER ^{4}HAD BEEN DRINKING'

A question mark (?) is often used when something is not certain.

CRISIS OVER BY SEPTEMBER?

For other styles with special grammar, see 1.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark18>>3 vocabulary

Short words save space, and so they are very common in headlines. Some
of the short words in headlines are unusual in ordinary language (e.g.
curb, meaning ‘restrict^{1} or ‘restriction'), and some are used in
special senses which they do not often have in ordinary language (e.g.
bid, meaning 'attempt'). Other words are chosen not because they are
short, but because they sound dramatic (e.g. blaze, which means ‘big
fire', and is used in headlines to refer to any fire). The following is
a list of common headline vocabulary.

act take action; do something

FOOD CRISIS: GOVERNMENT TO ACT aid military or financial help; to help
MORE AID FOR POOR COUNTRIES UNICfNS AID HOSPITAL STRIKERS alert alarm,
warning

FLOOD ALERT ON EAST COAST

allege make an accusation

WOMAN ALLEGES UNFAIR TREATMENT appear appear in court accused of a crime
MP TO APPEAR ON DRUGS CHARGES axe abolish, close down; abolition,
closure COUNTRY BUS SERVICES AXED SMALL SCHOOLS FACE AXE

BA British Airways

BA MAKES RECORD LOSS back support

AMERICA BACKS BRITISH PEACE MOVE ban forbid, refuse to allow something;
prohibition US BANS STEEL IMPORTS NEW BAN ON DEMONSTRATIONS bar
refuse/refusal to allow entry HOTEL BARS FOOTBALL FANS NEW BAR ON
IMMIGRANTS bid attempt

JAPANESE WOMEN IN NEW EVEREST BID blast explosion; criticise violently
BLAST AT PALACE PM BLASTS CRITICS blaze fire

SIX DIE IN HOTEL BLAZE block stop, delay

TORIES BLOCK TEACHERS' PAY DF.AL blow bad news; discouragement;
unfortunate happening SMITH ILL: BLOW TO WORLD CUP HOPES bolster give
support/encouragement to

EXPORT FIGURES BOLSTER CITY CONFIDENCE bond political /business
association NEW TRADE BONDS WITH ICELAND boom big increase; prosperous
period

SPENDING BOOM OVER, SAYS MINISTER boost encourage(ment); to increase; an
increase PLAN TO BOOST EXPORTS brink edge (of disaster)

WORLD ON BRINK OF WAR Brussels the European Community parliament and
administration BRUSSELS BANS BRITISH BLACKBERRY WINE

call (for) demand/appeal (for)

CALL FOR STRIKE TALKS HOSPITAL ROW: MP CALLS FOR ENQUIRY campaign
organised effort to achieve social or political result MP LAUNCHES
CAMPAIGN FOR PRISON REFORM cash money

MORE CASH NEEDED FOR SCHOOLS charge accusation (by police)

THREE MEN HELD ON BOMB CHARGE    ► chop abolition, closure

300 BANK BRANCHES FACE CHOP City London's financial institutions NEW
TRADE FIGURES PLEASE CITY claim (make) a statement that something is
true (especially when there may be disagreement); pay claim demand for
higher wages SCIENTIST CLAIMS CANCER BREAKTHROUGH RACISM CLAIM IN NAVY
TEACHERS' PAY CLAIM REJECTED clamp down on deal firmly with (usually
something illegal)

POLICE TO CLAMP DOWN ON SPEEDING clash quarrel, fight (noun or verb)

PM IN CLASH OVER ARMS SALES STUDENTS CLASH WITH POLICE clear find
innocent

DOCTOR CLEARED OF DRUGS CHARGE Commons the House of Commons (in
Parliament)

MINISTERS IN COMMONS CLASH OVER HOUSING con swindle

TEENAGERS CON WIDOW OUT OF LIFE SAVINGS crackdown firm application of
the law

GOVERNMENT PROMISES CRACKDOWN ON DRUGS DEALERS crash financial failure

BANK CRASH THREATENS TO BRING DOWN GOVERNMENT curb restrict; restriction
NEW PRICE CURBS cut reduce; reduction

BRITAIN CUTS OVERSEAS AID NEW HEALTH SERVICE CUTS cutback reduction
(usually financial)

TEACHERS SLAM SCHOOL CUTBACKS

dash (make) quick journey

PM IN DASH TO BLAST HOSPITAL deadlock disagreement that cannot be solved
DEADLOCK IN PEACE TALKS deal agreement, bargain

TEACHERS REJECT NEW PAY DEAL demo demonstration

30 ARRESTED IN ANTI-TAX DEMO dole unemployment pay DOLE QUEUES LENGTHEN
drama dramatic event; tense situation PRINCE IN AIRPORT DRAMA drive
united effort

DRIVE TO SAVE WATER drop give up, get rid of; fall (noun)

GOVERNMENT TO DROP CHILD LABOUR PLAN BIG DROP IN INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT
due expected to arrive

QUEEN DUE IN BERLIN TODAY duo two people

HANDICAPPED DUO ROW ACROSS ATLANTIC

EU The European Union

EU TRADE MINISTERS TO MEET edge move gradually

WORLD EDGES TOWARDS WAR envoy ambassador

FRENCH ENVOY DISAPPEARS

face be threatened by

HOSPITALS FACE MORE CUTS STRIKERS FACE SACK feud long-lasting quarrel or
dispute

FAMILY FEUD EXPLODES INTO VIOLENCE: SIX HELD find something that is
found

BEACH FIND MAY BE BONES OF UNKNOWN DINOSAUR firm determined not to
change PM FIRM ON TAX LEVELS flak heavy criticism

GOVERNMENT FACES FLAK OVER VAT flare begin violently

RIOTS FLARE IN ULSTER foil prevent somebody from succeeding

TWELVE-YEAR-OLD FOILS BANK RAIDERS fraud swindle, deceit

JAIL FOR TICKET FRAUD MEN freeze keep(ing) prices etc at their present
level; block(ing) a bank account MINISTER WANTS TWO-YEAR PAY FREEZE DRUG
PROFITS FROZEN fuel provide reason for growth (of anger, protest etc)

PA Y FREEZE FUELS UNION ANGER

gag censor(ship), prevent(ion) from speaking AFRICAN PRESIDENT ACTS TO
GAG PRESS gems jewels

£2m GEMS STOLEN go resign; be lost, disappear PM TO GO?

4,000 JOBS TO GO IN NORTH go for be sold for

PICASSO DRAWING GOES FOR £5m go-ahead approval

SCOTTISH ROAD PLAN GETS GO-AHEAD grab take violently

INVESTORS GRAB SHARES IN SCOTTISH COMPANIES grip control; hold tightly

REBELS TIGHTEN GRIP ON SOUTH COLD WAVE GRIPS COUNTRY gun down shoot

TERRORISTS GUN DOWN PRIEST    »>

hail welcome, praise PM HAILS PEACE PLAN halt stop

CAR PLANT TO HALT PRODUCTION haul amount stolen in robbery, or seized by
police or customs TRAIN ROBBERY: BIG GOLD HAUL RECORD DRUGS HAUL AT
AIRPORT head lead; leader

PM TO HEAD TRADE MISSION COMMONWEALTH HEADS TO MEET IN OTTAWA head
for/to move towards

ECONOMY HEADING FOR DISASTER, EXPERTS WARN heed pay attention to

GOVERNMENT MUST HEED DIVORCE FIGURES. SAYS BISHOP hike (AmE) rise in
costs, prices etc INTEREST HIKE WILL HIT BUSINESS hit affect badly

SNOWSTORMS HIT TRANSPORT hit out at attack (with words)

PM HITS OUT AT CRITICS hitch problem that causes delay

LAST-MINUTE HITCH DELAYS SATELLITE LAUNCH hold arrest; keep under arrest

MAN HELD AFTER STATION BLAST POLICE HOLD TERROR SUSPECT

in (the) red in debt; making a financial loss BRITISH STEEL IN RED IRA
Irish Republican Army

IRA LEADER MAKES STATEMENT

jail prison

JAIL FOR PEACE MARCHERS jobless unemployed (people)

THREE MILLION JOBLESS BY APRIL?

key important, vital

KEY WITNESS VANISHES

landslide victory by large majority in election LANDSLIDE FOR
NATIONALISTS lash criticise violently

BISHOP LASHES TV SEX AND VIOLENCE launch send (satellite etc) into
space; begin (campaign etc); put (new product) on market

SPACE TELESCOPE LAUNCH DELAYED

ENVIRONMENT MINISTER LAUNCHES CAMPAIGN FOR CLEANER BEACHES

BRITISH FIRM LAUNCHES THROW-AWAY CHAIRS lead clue (in police enquiry)

NEW LEAD IN PHONEBOX MURDER CASE

leak unofficial publication of secret information PM FURIOUS OVER TAX
PLAN LEAKS leap big increase LEAP IN IMPORTS life imprisonment ‘for
life'

LIFE FOR AXE MURDERER link connection, contact

NEW TRADE LINKS WITH PERU

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark19>>loom threaten to happen

VAT ON FOOD: NEW ROW LOOMS Lords the House of Lords (in Parliament)

LORDS VOTE ON DOG REGISTRATION lotto the national lottery

DANCING GRANDMOTHER IN RECORD LOTTO WIN

mar spoil

CROWD VIOLENCE MARS CUP FINAL mercy intended to save lives

DOCTOR IN MERCY DASH TO EVEREST mission delegation (official group sent
to conference etc)

SHOTS FIRED AT UN MISSION mob angry crowd; organised crime / Mafia (AmE)

MOBS RAMPAGE THROUGH CITY STREETS MOB LEADERS HELD move step towards a
particular result (often political)

MOVE TO BOOST TRADE LINKS WITH JAPAN MP Member of Parliament MP DENIES
DRUGS CHARGE MEP Member of the European Parliament MEPS WANT MORE PAY

nail force somebody to admit the truth

MP NAILS MINISTER ON PIT CLOSURE PLANS net win, capture

TWO SISTERS NET £3m IN POOLS WIN no 10 the Prime Minister's residence
(No 10 Downing Street)

ANOTHER PETITION HANDED IN AT No 10

OAP old age pensioner; anybody over 65 OAPS MARCH AGAINST WAR PLANS odds
chances, probability

JONES RE-ELECTED AGAINST THE ODDS on about, on the subject of,
concerning NEW MOVE ON PENSIONS opt (for) choose

WALES OPTS FOR INDEPENDENCE oust drive out, replace

MODERATES OUSTED IN UNION ELECTIONS out to intending to

NATIONALISTS OUT TO CAPTURE MASS VOTE    ►

over about, on the subject of, because of ROW OVER AID CUTS

pact agreement

DEFENCE PACT RUNS INTO TROUBLE pay wages

TRANSPORT PAY TALKS BREAK DOWN PC police constable

PC SHOT IN BANK RAID peak high point

BANK LENDING HITS NEW PEAK peer lord; Member of the House of Lords

PEERS REJECT GOVERNMENT WAGE-FREEZE BAN peg hold (prices etc) at present
level BANKS PEG INTEREST RATES pensioner old age pensioner; anybody over
65 PENSIONER SKIS DOWN MONT BLANC peril danger

FLOOD PERIL IN THAMES VALLEY pit coal mine

PIT TURNED INTO MUSEUM plant factory

STEEL PLANT BLAZE plea call for help

BIG RESPONSE TO PLEA FOR FLOOD AID pledge promise

GOVERNMENT GIVES PLEDGE ON JOBLESS PM Prime Minister EGG THROWN AT PM
poised to ready to, about to

TORIES POISED TO MAKE ELECTION GAINS poll election; public opinion
survey TORIES AHEAD IN POLLS pools football pools: a form of gambling in
which people guess the results of football matches

SISTERS SHARE BIG POOLS WIN premier head of government GREEK PREMIER TO
VISIT UK press the newspapers

BID TO GAG PRESS OVER DEFENCE SPENDING press (for) urge, encourage, ask
for urgently MINISTER PRESSED TO ACT ON HOUSING OPPOSITION PRESS FOR
ENQUIRY ON AIR CRASHES probe investigation; investigate

CALL FOR STUDENT DRUGS PROBE POLICE PROBE RACING SCANDAL pull out
withdraw; pull-out withdrawal US PULLS OUT OF ARMS TALKS

CHURCH CALLS FOR BRITISH PULL-OUT FROM ULSTER push (for) ask for,
encourage

SCHOOLS PUSH FOR MORE CASH quake earthquake

HOUSES DAMAGED IN WELSH QUAKE quit resign, leave

CHURCH LEADER QUITS MINISTER TO QUIT GOVERNMENT quiz question (verb)

POLICE QUIZ MILLIONAIRE SUPERMARKET BOSS

raid enter and search; attack (noun and verb), rob, robbery POLICE RAID
DUCHESS'S FLAT BIG GEMS RAID rampage riot

FOOTBALL FANS RAMPAGE THROUGH SEASIDE TOWNS rap criticise

DOCTORS RAP NEW MINISTRY PLANS rates (bank) interest rates RATES RISE
EXPECTED record bigger than ever before

RECORD LOSS BY INSURANCE FIRM riddle mystery

MISSING ENVOY RIDDLE: WOMAN HELD rift division, disagreement

LABOUR RIFT OVER DEFENCE POLICY rock shock, shake

BANK SEX SCANDAL ROCKS CITY IRELAND ROCKED BY QUAKE row noisy
disagreement, quarrel NEW ROW OVER PENSION CUTS rule out reject the
possibility of

PM RULES OUT AUTUMN ELECTION

sack dismiss(al) from job

STRIKING POSTMEN FACE SACK saga long-running news story

NEW REVELATIONS IN BANK SEX SAGA scare public alarm, alarming rumour
TYPHOID SCARE IN SOUTHWEST scoop win (prize etc)

PENSIONER SCOOPS LOTTO FORTUNE scrap throw out (as useless)

GOVERNMENT SCRAPS NEW ROAD PLANS seek look for

POLICE SEEK WITNESS TO KILLING seize take (especially in police and
customs searches)

POLICE SEIZE ARMS AFTER CAR CHASE £3m DRUGS SEIZED AT AIRPORT set to
ready to; about to

INTEREST RATES SET TO RISE shed get rid of

CAR FIRM TO SHED 5,000 JOBS    ► slam criticise violently

BISHOP SLAMS DEFENCE POLICY slash cut, reduce drastically

GOVERNMENT TO SLASH HEALTH EXPENDITURE slate criticise

PM SLATES BISHOP slay (AmE) murder

FREEWAY KILLER SLAYS SIX slump fall (economic)

EXPORTS SLUMP    CITY FEARS NEW SLUMP

snatch rob, robbery

BIG WAGES SNATCH IN WEST END soar rise dramatically

IMPORTS SOAR FOR THIRD MONTH spark cause (trouble) to start

REFEREE'S DECISION SPARKS RIOT split disagree(ment)

CABINET SPLIT ON PRICES POLICY spree wild spending expedition

BUS DRIVER SPENDS £30,000 IN THREE-DAY CREDIT CARD SPREE stake financial
interest

JAPANESE BUY STAKE IN BRITISH AIRWAYS storm angry public disagreement
STORM OVER NEW STRIKE LAW storm out of leave angrily

TEACHERS' LEADERS STORM OUT OF MEETING stun surprise, shock

JOBLESS FIGURES STUN CITY surge sudden increase; rise suddenly SURGE IN
JOBLESS FIGURES swap exchange

HEART SWAP BOY BETTER sway persuade

HOSPITAL PROTEST SWAYS MINISTERS switch to change; a change DEFENCE
POLICY SWITCH swoop to raid; a police raid

POLICE IN DAWN SWOOP ON DRUGS GANG

threat danger

TEACHERS' STRIKE THREAT toll number killed

QUAKE TOLL MAYBE £5,000 top (adj) senior, most important TOP BANKER
KIDNAPPED top (verb) exceed

IMPORTS TOP LAST YEAR'S FIGURES Tory Conservative

VICTORY FOR TORY MODERATES trio three people

JAILBREAK TRIO RECAPTURED

troops soldiers

MORE TROOPS FOR BORDER AREA

UK The United Kingdom (of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) BRUSSELS
CRITICISES UK JAIL CONDITIONS Ulster Northern Ireland

PM IN SECRET TRIP TO ULSTER UN The United Nations

UN IN RED: CANNOT BALANCE BUDGET urge encourage

GOVERNMENT URGED TO ACT ON POLLUTION US The United States of America

US URGED TO PULL OUT OF MIDDLE EAST

VAT value added tax

NEXT, VAT ON BABYFOOD? vow promise

EXILED PRESIDENT VOWS TO RETURN

walk out leave in protest

CAR WORKERS WALK OUT OVER WAGE FREEZE web world-wide web, internet

WEB SHOPPING UP BY 50% IN TWO YEARS wed marry

BISHOP TO WED ACTRESS

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark20>>241 hear and listen (to)

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark21>>1    hear: meaning

Hear is the ordinary word to say that something ‘comes to our ears'.
Suddenly I heard a strange noise. (not Suddenly I listened to a strange
notse.)

Can you hear me?

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark22>>2    listen (to): meaning

Listen (to) is used to talk about paying attention to sounds that are
going on_{t} in progress. It emphasises the idea of concentrating,
trying to hear as well as possible. You can hear something without
wanting to, but you can only listen to something deliberately. Compare:

I heard them talking upstairs, but I didn't really listen to their
conversation. Listen carefully, please. * Could you speak louder? I
can't hear you very well. I didn't hear the phone because I was
listening to the radio.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark23>>3    complete experiences: hear

Listen (to) is mostiy used to talk about concentrating on experiences
that are going on, in progress. To talk about the result of listening:
experiencing or

understanding the whole of a performance, speech, piece of music,
broadcast or other communication, we generally use hear. Compare:

-    When she arrived, I was listening to a record of Brendel playing
Beethoven.

(not ... I washearing...)

I once heard Brendel play all the Beethoven concertos, (not / once
listened to Brendel play...)

-    I wish I had more time to listen to the radio. (not ... to hear the
radio.) Did you hear / listen to the news yesterday?

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark24>>4    hear not used in progressive forms

Hear is not usually used in progressive forms. To say that one hears
something at the moment of speaking, can hear is often used, especially
in British English (see 125).

I can hear somebody coming, (not I am hearing...)

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark25>>5    listen and listen to

When there is no object, listen is used without to. Compare:

Listen! (not Listen to!) Listen to me! (not Listen me!)

There are similar differences between see, look (at) and watch. See 506.

For hear + object + infinitive/-ing, see 242.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark26>>242 hear, see etc + object + verb form

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark27>>1 object + infinitive or -ing form

Hear, see, watch, notice and similar verbs of perception can be followed
by object + infinitive (without to) or object + -ing form.

I heard him go down the stairs. I heard him going down the stairs.

(not / heard him went doum-the-stairs.)

There is often a difference of meaning. After these verbs, an infinitive
suggests that we hear or see the whole of an action or event; an -ing
form suggests that we hear or see something in progress, going on.
Compare:

-    I saw her cross the road. (= I saw her cross it from one side to
the other.)

I saw her crossing the road. (= I saw her in the middle, on her way
across.)

-    I once heard him give a talk on Japanese politics.

As I walked past his room I heard him talking on the phone.

-    Watch me Jump over the stream.

I like to watch people walking in the street.

-    I heard the bomb explode. (not I heard the bomb exploding.)

I saw the book lying on the table, (not I saw the -book lie ...)

A progressive form can suggest repetition.

I saw her throwing stones at the other children.

After can see/hear (which refer to actions and events that are in
progress - see 125), only the -ing structure is used.

I could see John getting on the bus. (not / could see John get...)

These structures can be used after passive forms of hear and see. In
this case, the infinitive has to.

He was never heard to say ^{4}thank you' in his life, (not He-was
never-heard say-...)

Justice must not only be done; it must be seen to be done She was seen
walking away from the accident.

Passive forms of watch and notice are not used in this way.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    possessives not used

After these verbs, possessives cannot be used with -mg forms.

I saw Mary crossing the road, (not /-mw-Mary-s-erossing-tke-rtmd.)

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark29>>3    object + past participle

In this structure, the past participle has a passive meaning.

I heard my name repeated several times. (= My name was repeated.)

Have you ever seen a television thrown through a window?

The idea of ‘action or event in progress' can be given by a progressive
form (being + past participle).

As I watched the tree being cut down ...

I woke up to hear the bedroom door being opened slowly.

These structures are not possible after passive forms of hear and see.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark30>>4    look at

Look at can be followed by object + -ing form, and in American English
also by object + infinitive.

Look at him eating! Look at him eat! (AmE)

For more about verbs that can be followed by both infinitives and -ing
forms, see 299.

For the difference between hear and listen, see 241.

For see, look and watch, see 506.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark31>>243 hear, see etc with that-clause

The present-tense forms I hear (that) ... and I see (that) ... are often
used to introduce pieces of news which one has heard, read or seen on
television.

I hear (that) Alice is expecting a baby.

I see (that) the firemen are going on strike.

Some other verbs can be used like this. Common examples are understand
and gather. These are often used to check information.

I understand you're moving to a new job. * Yes, that's right.

/ gather you didn't like the party. - What makes you say that?

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark32>>244 help

After help, we can use object + infinitive (with or without to).

Can you help me (to) find my ring? (not Thank you so much for helping us
(to) repair the car.

Our main task is to help the company (to) become profitable. Help can
also be followed direcdy by an infinitive without an object. Would you
like to help wash up?

For the expression can't help ...ing., see 126.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark33>>245    here and there

We use here for the place where the speaker/writer is, and there for
other places.

(on the telephone) Hello, is Tom there?*No, I'm sorry, he^{f}s not here.

(not ... he's not there:)

Don't stay there in the comer by yourself. Come over here and talk to
us. Note that here and there cannot normally be used as nouns.

This place i$ terrible. It is terrible here, (but not Here is terrible.)

Did you like that place? (but not Bidryou like there?)

There are similar differences between this and that (see 589), come and
go (see 134) and bring and take (see 112).

For here's and there's followed by plural nouns, see 532.4.

For inverted word order after here and there, see 303.1.

For Here you are, see 545.18.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark34>>246    high and tall

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark35>>1    What kind of things are fa/A?

We use tall mostly for people, trees, buildings with many floors, and a
few other things which are higher than they are wide (e.g. factory
chimneys or electricity pylons).

How tall are you? (not How high are-you?)

There are some beautiful tall trees at the end of our garden.

In other cases we usually prefer high.

Mount Elbrus is the highest mountain in Europe.

The garden's got very high walls.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark36>>2    measurements

In measurements, we use tall for people, but we prefer high for things.
Compare:

Vm lm 93 tall That tree is about 30m high.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark37>>3    distance above the ground

We use high to talk about distance above the ground. A child standing on
a chair may be higher than her mother, although she is probably not
taller. That shelf is too high far me to reach.

The clouds are very high today.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark38>>4    parts of the body

Parts of the body can be long, but not tall

Alex has got beautiful long legs, (not ... tall legs:)

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark39>>247    hire, rent and let

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark40>>1 hire and rent

Hire and rent can mean: ‘pay for the use of something'. In British
English, rent is used for arrangements involving a long period of time
(one rents a house, a flat, a TV). For shorter periods (e.g. paying for
a car, a boat, evening dress) rent and hire can both be used.

How much does it cost to rent a two-room flat?

I need to hire/rent a car for the weekend.

Hire (out) and rent (out) can also mean ‘sell the use of something*.

There's a shop in High Street that hires/rents (out) evening dress.

In American English, rent is the normal word for both longer and shorter
arrangements; hire, in American English, normally means 'employ*.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark41>>2 let

Let is used in British English, like rent (out), to talk about selling
the use of rooms, houses etc.

We let the upstairs room to a student.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark42>>248    holiday and holidays

In British English, the plural holidays is often used for the 'long
holiday* of the year. In other cases we normally use the singular
holiday. Compare:

Where are you going for your summer holiday(s)?

We get five days' Christmas holiday this year.

Next Monday is a public holiday.

The singular is used in the British expression on holiday (note the
preposition).

/ met Marianne on holiday in Norway. (not .. . on/in holidays...)
Americans more often use the word vacation. (In British English,
vacation is mainly used for the periods when universities are not
teaching.) Holiday is most often used in American English for a day of
publicly observed celebration (such as Thanksgiving) when people do not
have to work.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark43>>249    home

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark44>>1 articles and prepositions

No article is used in the expression at home (meaning ‘in one*s own
place*).

Is anybody at home? (not ... at-the-home?)

At is often dropped, especially in American English.

Is anybody home?

Home (without to) can be used as an adverb referring to direction.

I think HI go home, (not ..to-home.)

There is no special preposition in English to express the idea of being
at somebody's home (like French chez_{t} German bei,
Danish/Swedish/Norwegian hos etc). One way of saying this is to use at
with a possessive.

We had a great evening at Philip's.

Ring up and see if Jacqueline is at the Smiths', could you?

Possessive pronouns cannot be used in this way, though.

Come round to my place for a drink, (not .. -to mine...)    ►

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark45>>2 house and home

House is an emotionally neutral word: it just refers to a particular
type of building. Home is used more personally: it is the place that
somebody lives in, and can express the idea of emotional attachment to a
place. Compare: There are some horrible new houses in our village.

I lived there for six years, but I never really felt it was my home.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark46>>250    hope

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    tenses after hope

After I hope, we often use a present tense with a future meaning.

I hope she likes (= will like) the flowers.

I hope the bus comes soon.

For a similar use of present tenses after bet, see 103.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    negative sentences

In negative sentences, we usually put not with the verb that comes after
hope. I hope she doesn't wake up. (not / don't hope she wakes-up.)

For negative structures with think, believe etc, see 369.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark49>>3    special uses of past tenses

We can use I was hoping ... to introduce a polite request.

I was hoping you could lend me some money.

I had hoped... refers to hopes for things that did not happen.

I had hoped that Jennifer would study medicine, but she didn't want to.

For more about the use of past tenses in polite requests, see 436.

For / hope sot not, see 539.

For the differences between hope, expect_{t} wait and look Jbrward, see
196.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark50>>251    hopefully

One meaning of hopefully is ‘full of hope', ‘hoping'.

She sat there waiting hope/idly for the phone to ring.

Another, more recent meaning is ‘it is to be hoped that' or ‘I hope'.
Hopefully, inflation will soon be under control Hopefully Vm not
disturbing you?

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark51>>252    how

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark52>>1 use and word order

How is used to introduce questions or the answers to questions.

How did you do it?

Tell me how you did it.

I know how he did it.

We also use how in exclamations (see 195). The word order is not the
same as in questions. Compare:

-    How cold is it?

How cold it is!

-    How do you like my hair?

How I love weekends! (not How do ilove weekends!)

-    How have you been?

How you've grown! (not How have-yeu-grewn!)

When how is used in an exclamation with an adjective or adverb, this
comes immediately after how.

How beautiful the trees are! (not How the trees are beGtetiftttt)

How well she plays! (not How-she-plays well!)

For the difference between how and what like, see 253.

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark53>>2    with adjectives/adverbs: how, not how
much

We use how_{t} not how much, before adjectives and adverbs.

How tall are you? (not How-~mueh-tabl-areyou^{:}?)

Show me how fast you can run. (not ...-how-mttchrfast-...)

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark54>>3    comparisons: how not used

In comparisons we use as or like (see 326) or the way (see below), not
how. Hold it in both hands, as / like / the way Mummy does.

(not ... how-Mummy does:)

<<main-15.xhtml#bookmark55>>4    how, what and why

These three question words can sometimes be confused. Note particularly
the following common structures.

How do you know? (not Why do you know?)

What do you call this? (not How-do you call thisT)

What's that... called? (not H&w is that... called?)

What do you think? (not How do-you-ihink?)

What? What did you say? (not How?-How did you say?)

Why should I think that?

Both What about...? and How about... ? are used to make suggestions, and
to bring up points that have been forgotten.

What/How about eating out this evening?

What/How about the kids? Who's going to look after them?

In exclamations (see 195), what is used before noun phrases; how is used
before adjectives (without nouns), adverbs and verb phrases.

What a marvellous house!

How marvellous! How you've changed!

<<main-16.xhtml>>

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark0>>5    how much, how many, how old, how far etc

Many interrogative expressions of two or more words begin with how.
These are used to ask for measurements, quantities etc. Examples:

How much do you weigh?

How many people were there?

How old are your parents?

How far is your house? How often do you come to New York?    ►

Note that English does not have a special expression to ask for ordinal
numbers {first, second etc).

It's our wedding anniversary: * Congratulations. Which one? (not ..
.-the how-manyeth?)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark1>>6    how-dauses in sentences

How-clauses are common as the objects of verbs like ask, tell, wonder or
know, which can introduce indirect questions.

Don't ask me how the journey was.

Tell us how you did it.

I wonder how animals talk to each other.

Does anybody know how big the universe is?

How-c\a\ises can also be used as subjects, complements or adverbials,
especially in a more informal style.

How you divide up the money is your business, (subject)

This is how much I've done since this morning, (complement after be)

I spend my money how I like, (adverbial)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark2>>7    the way

The way (see 615) can often be used instead of non-interrogative how.
Note that the way and how are not used together.

Look at the way those cats wash each other, or Look at how those cats...

(not ..the way-how-those cats wash ...)

The way you organise the work is for you to decide. or How you
organise... (not The way how you organise-...)

For how to ..see 286.    For how ever, see 624.

For learn how to..., see 317. For however, see 49, 157.3, 625.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark3>>253 how and what... like?

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark4>>1    changes: How's Ron?

We generally use how to ask about things that change - for example
people's moods and health. We prefer what... like to ask about things
that do not change - for example people's character and appearance.
Compare:

-    How's Ron? *He's very well.

What's Ron like? ~He's quiet and a bit shy.

-    How does she look today? * Tired.

What does she look like? * Short and dark pretty, cheerful-looking.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark5>>2    reactions: How was the film?

We often use how to ask about people's reactions to their experiences.

What... like is also possible.

How was the film? * Very good, (oh What was the film like ...?)

How's your steak? How's the new job?

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark6>>254 -ic and -ical

Many adjectives end in -ic or -ical. There is no general rule to tell
you which form is correct in a particular case.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark7>>1 some adjectives normally ending in -ic

| academic     | dramatic    | linguistic   | semantic     |
| algebraic    | egoistic    | majestic     | syntactic    |
| arithmetic   | emphatic    | neurotic     | systematic   |
| artistic     | energetic   | pathetic     | tragic       |
| athletic     | fantastic   | pedagogic    |              |
| catholic     | geometric   | phonetic     |              |
| domestic     | strategic   | public       |              |

arithmetical, geometrical and pedagogical also occur.

Some of these words ended in -ical in older English (e.g. fantastical,
majestical, tragical).

New adjectives which come into the language generally end in -ic, except
for those ending in -logical.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark8>>2 some adjectives ending in -ical

biological (and many other adjectives ending in -logical)

chemical    fanatical    medical    surgical

critical    logical    musical    tactical

cynical    mathematical    physical    topical

grammatical    mechanical    radical

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark9>>3 differences of meaning

In some cases, both forms exist but with a difference of meaning.

a classic and classical

Classic usually refers to a famous traditional style.

He's a classic 1960s hippy who has never changed She buys classic cars
and restores them.

Classical refers to the culture of ancient Greece and Rome, or to
European works of art of the so-called ‘classical' period in the 18th
century.

She's studying classical languages and literature at Cambridge.

Classical music means ‘serious* music, not pop or jazz.

It's hard to learn classical guitar.

b comic and comical

Comic is the normal adjective for artistic comedy. comic verse comic
opera Shakespeare's comic technique Comical is a rather old-fashioned
word meaning ‘funny'.

a comical expression    ►

Economic refers to the science of economics, or to the economy of a
country.

economic theory economic problems Economical means ‘not wasting money'.

an economical little car an economical housekeeper

d electric and electrical

Electric is used with the names of particular machines that work by
electricity.

an electric motor electric blankets Note also: an electric shock; an
electric atmosphere (full of excitement). Electrical is used before more
general words. electrical appliances electrical equipment electrical
component electrical engineering

e historic and historical

Historic is used especially for historically important places, remains,
customs etc, and for moments which ‘make history*.

We spent our holiday visiting historic houses and castles in France.

Our two countries are about to make a historic agreement.

Historical means ‘connected with the study of history' or ‘really
existing in history'.

historical research a historical novel

historical documents Was King Arthur a historical figure?

f magic and magical

Magic is the more common word, and is used in a number of fixed
expressions.

a magic wand (= a magician's stick) the magic word a magic carpet
Magical is sometimes used instead of magic, especially in metaphorical
senses like ‘mysterious', ‘wonderful' or ‘exciting'.

It was a magical experience.

g politic and political

Politic is a rather unusual word for ‘wise', ‘prudent'.

I don*t think it would be politic to ask for a loan just now.

Political means ‘connected with politics'. political history a political
career

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark10>>4    adverbs

Note that whether the adjective ends in -ic or -ical, the adverb ends in
-ically (pronounced /ikli/). The one common exception is publicly (not
pttblically).

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark11>>5    nouns ending in -/cs

Many nouns ending in -ics are singular (e.g. physics, athletics). Some
can be either singular or plural (e.g. mathematics, politics). For
details, see 524.3.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark12>>255 idioms, collocations and fixed
expressions

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark13>>1    What are idioms?

An expression like turn up (meaning ‘arrive'), break even (meaning ‘make
neither a profit nor a loss') or a can of worms (meaning ‘a complicated
problem') can be difficult to understand, because its meaning is
different from the meanings of the separate words in the expression. (If
you know break and even, this does not help you at all to understand
break even.) Expressions like these are called ‘idioms'. Idioms are
usually special to one language and cannot be translated word for word
(though related languages may share some idioms).

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark14>>2    verbs with particles or prepositions

Common short verbs like bring, come, do, get, give, go, have, keep,
make, put, and take are very often used with prepositions or adverb
particles (e.g. on, off, up, away) to make two-word verbs. These are
called ‘prepositional verbs' or ‘phrasal verbs', and many of them are
idiomatic.

Can you look after the cats while I'm away?

She just doesn't know how to bring up children.

I gave up chemistry because I didn't like it.

Many of these two-word verbs are especially common in informed speech
and writing. Compare:

-    What time are you planning to turn up? (informal)

Please let us know when you plan to arrive. (more formal)

-    Just keep on till you get to the crossroads, (informal)

Continue as far as the crossroads, (formal)

For details of phrasal and prepositional verbs, see 599-600.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark15>>3    collocations (conventional word
combinations)

We can say I fully understand, but not I fully like; I rather like, but
not I rather understand; I firmly believe, but not I firmly think.
Somebody can be a heavy smoker or a devoted friend, but not a devoted
smoker or a heavy friend. Expressions like these are also idiomatic, in
a sense. They are easy to understand, but not so easy for a learner to
produce correctly. One can think of many adjectives that might be used
with smoker to say that somebody smokes a lot - for example big, strong,
hard, fierce, mad, devoted. It just happens that English speakers have
chosen to use heavy, and one has to know this in order to express the
idea naturally and correctly. These conventional combinations of words
are called ‘collocations', and all languages have large numbers of them.
Some more examples:

a crashing bore (but not a crashing nuisance) a burning desire (but not
a-blazing desire) a blazing row (but not a burning row) highly reliable
(but not highly old) a golden opportunity (but not a-golden chance)
change one's mind (but not change one's thoughts)

Thanks a lot. (but not Thank you a lot.)    ►

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark16>>4    situational language: fixed expressions

The expressions that are used in typical everyday situations are often
idiomatic in the same sense. With the help of a dictionary and a
grammar, one could invent various possible ways of expressing a
particular common idea, but generally there are only one or two ways
that happen to be used by English speakers, and one has to know what
they are in order to speak or write naturally. Some examples:

Could you check the oil? (More natural than Could you inspect the oil?
or Could you see how much oil there is in the engine?)

Is it a direct flight or do I have to change? (More natural than Does
the plane go straight there or do I have to get another one?)

Sorry I kept you waiting. (More natural than Sorry I made you wait.)

Could I reserve a table for three for eight o'clock? (More natural than
Could you keep me a table for three persons for eight o'clock?)

Other fixed expressions are used as parts of sentences - useful
introductions, conclusions or frames for the things that people want to
say.

Let me know when!where!whatlhow ...

The best thing would be to ...    (do something) as a favour.

The point is...    ...is more trouble than it's worth.

I wouldn't be surprised if...    I'll... on condition that you.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark17>>5    using idioms, collocations and fixed
expressions.

Idioms, collocations and fixed expressions are common in all kinds of
English, formal and informal, spoken and written. Informal spoken
language is often very idiomatic.

Students should not worry because they do not know all the expressions
of this kind that are commonly used by English speakers. If they use
non-idiomatic ways of expressing ideas, they will normally be
understood, and English speakers do not expect foreigners to speak
perfect natural English. It is therefore not necessary for students to
make great efforts to memorise idioms, collocations etc: they will leam
the most common ones naturally along with the rest of their English. In
particular, note that books of idioms often contain expressions which
are slangy, rare or out of date, and which students should avoid unless
they understand exactly how and when the expressions are used. This is
especially true of colourful idioms like, for example, raining cats and
dogs, as cross as two sticks (= angry) or kick the bucket (- die). If
students try consciously to fill their speech and writing with such
expressions the effect will probably be very strange.

It is, however, helpful for learners to have a good up-to-date
dictionary of collocations (for example the Oxford Dictionary of
Collocations) in order to become aware of the most common word
combinations.

For more about formal and informal language, see 311.

For slang, see 533.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark18>>256 if (1): introduction

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark19>>1    uncertain events and situations

In clauses after if we usually talk about uncertain events and
situations: things which may or may not happen, which may or may not be
true, etc.

Ask John if he's staying tonight (He may or may not be staying.)

If I see Annie, III give her your love. (I may or may not see Annie.)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark20>>2    conditions

An (f-clause often refers to a condition - something which must happen
so that something else can happen.

If you get here before eight, we can catch the early train.

Oil floats if you pour it on water Clauses of this kind are often called
‘conditional* clauses. Verb phrases with would/should are also sometimes
called ‘conditional*.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark21>>3    'first*, 'second' and 'third'
conditionals; other structures

Some students* grammars concentrate on three common sentence structures
with if, which are often called the ‘first*, ‘second* and ‘third*
conditionals.

'first conditional'

if -v present    will + infinitive

If we play tennis    I'll win.

‘second conditional'

if + past    would + infinitive

If we played tennis I would win.

‘third conditional'

past perfect    would have + past participle

If we had played tennis I would have won.

These are useful structures to practise. However, students sometimes
think that these are the only possibilities, and become confused when
they meet sentences like If she didn't phone this morning then she's
probably away (‘What's this? A fourth conditional?*). It is important to
realise that if is not only used in special structures with will and
would; it can also be used, like other conjunctions, in ordinary
structures with normal verb forms. For details, see the following
sections.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark22>>4    position of /7-dause

An //-clause can come at the beginning or end of a sentence. When an
(/-clause comes first, it is often separated by a comma.    »

Compare:

If you eat too much, you get fat.

You get fat if you eat too much.

For other meanings of if, see 261.10-13.

For if and whether in indirect speech, see 276, 621.

For if not and unless, see 601.

For more information about would/should, see 633.

For the difference between if and in case, see 271.

For even if see 189.4.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark23>>257    if (2): ordinary structures

If you didn't study physics at school, you won't understand this book.

I'll give her your love if I see her

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark24>>1    the same tenses as with other
conjunctions

When we are not talking about 'unreal^{1} situations (see 258), we use
the same tenses with if as with other conjunctions. Present tenses are
used to refer to the present, past tenses to the past, and so on.
Compare:

-    Oil floats if you pour it on water Iron goes red when it gets very
hot.

-    If John didn't come to work yesterday, he was probably ill.

As John didn't come to work yesterday, he was probably ill.

-    If you didn't study physics at school, you won't understand this
book. Because you didn't study physics at school you won't understand
this book,

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    present tense with future meaning

In an //-clause, we normally use a present tense to talk about the
future. This happens after most conjunctions (see 580). Compare:

-    Ill give her your love if I see her (not ... if I will see her.)

I'll give her your love when I see her. (not .. .-whert-I ■wiU-see-kerz)

-    If we have fine weather tomorrow, I'm going to paint the windows.

As soon as we have fine weather, I'm going to paint the windows.

For i/+ wiU (e.g. if it wiU make you feel better), see 260.

For if+ will in reported speech (e.g. I don't know if VU be ready), see
276.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark26>>258    if (3): special structures with past
tenses and would

If I knew her name, I would tell you.

What ivould you do if you lost your job?

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark27>>1 unreal situations

We use special structures with if when we are talking about unreal
situations -things that will probably not happen, situations that are
untrue or imaginary, and similar ideas. In these cases, we use past
tenses and would to 'distance' our language from reality.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    if-f past; would + infinitive without
to

To talk about unreal or improbable situations now or in the future, we
use a past tense in the (/-clause (even though the meaning is present or
future), and would + infinitive (without to) in the other part of the
sentence.

If I knew her name, I would tell you. (not If I know...)

(not If-I-wouid-know...) (not ... I willteH-you:)

She would be perfectly happy if she had a car.

What would you do if you lost your job?

This structure can make suggestions sound less definite, and so more
polite. It would be nice if you helped me a bit with the housework.

Would it be all right if I came round about seven tomorrow?

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark29>>3    would. should and'd

After / and we, should can be used with the same meaning as would.
(Would is more common in modem English; should is rare in AmE.)

If I knew her name, I should tell you.

If I married you, we should both be unhappy.

We use *d as a contraction (see 143).

We'd get up earlier if there was a good reason to.

For I should... meaning *1 advise you to ..see 264.2.

For would in the i/-clause, see 262.

For should in the /f-clause, see 261.1.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark30>>4    if I were etc

We often use were instead of was after if This is common in both formal
and informal styles. In a formal style were is more common than was, and
many people consider it more correct, especially in American English.
The grammatical name for this use of were is ‘subjunctive' (see 567).

If I were rich, I would spend all my time travelling.

If my nose were a little shorter I'd be quite pretty.

For the expression /// were you ..see 264.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark31>>5    ordinary tense-use or special
tense-use? If I come or if I came?

The difference between, for example, if I come and if I came is not
necessarily a difference of time. They can both refer to the future; but
the past tense suggests that a future situation is impossible, imaginary
or less probable. Compare:

-    If I become President, I'll... (said by a candidate in an election)

If I became President, Vd... (said by a schoolboy)

-    If I win this race, I'll... (said by the fastest runner)

If I won this race, I*d ... (said by the slowest runner)

-    Will it be all right if I bring a friend? (direct request)

Would it be all right if I brought a friend? (less direct, more polite)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark32>>6    could and might

We can use could to mean ‘would be able to' and might to mean ‘would
perhaps' or ‘would possibly'.    ►

If I had another £500,1 could buy a car.

If you asked me nicely, I might get you a drink.

For other cases where a past tense has a present or future meaning, see
426.

For if only, see 265.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark33>>259    if (4): unreal past situations

If you had worked harder, you would have passed your exam.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark34>>1    if + past perfect; would have + past
participle

To talk about past situations that did not happen, we use a past perfect
tense in the if-clause, and would have + past participle in the other
part of the sentence.

If you had asked me, I would have told you.

(not If you would have asked me...)

(not If you asked me...) (not ... I had told you.)

If you had worked harder, you would have passed your exam.

Fd have been in bad trouble if Jane hadn't helped me.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark35>>2    could have... and might have ...

We can use could have + past participle to mean 'would have been able
to.. and might have + past participle to mean ‘would perhaps have...' or
‘would possibly have ..

If he'd run a bit faster, he could have won.

If I hadn't been so tired, I might have realised what was happening.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark36>>3    present use: situations that are no
longer possible

We sometimes use structures with would have... to talk about present and
future situations which are no longer possible because of the way things
have turned out.

It would have been nice to go to Australia this winter, but there's no
way we can do it. (or It would be nice ...)

If my mother hadn't knocked my father off his bicycle thirty years ago,
I wouldn't have been here now. (or ... I wouldn't be here now.)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark37>>260    if (5): if ... will

I'll give you £100 if it will help you to go on holiday.

If Ann won't be here, we'd better cancel the meeting.

I don't know if I'll be ready in time.

If you will come this way...

If you will eat so much ...

We normally use a present tense with if {and most other conjunctions) to
refer to the future (see 580).

I'll phone you if I have time, (not ... if I will have time.)

But in certain situations we use if... will.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark38>>1    results

We use will with if to talk about what will happen because of possible
future actions - to mean ‘if this will be the later result*. Compare:

-    I'll give you £100 if 1 win the lottery. (Winning the lottery is a
condition - it must happen first.)

ril give you £100 if it'll kelp you to go on holiday. (The holiday is a
result - it follows the gift of money.)

-    We'll go home now if you get the car. (condition)

We'll go home now if it will make you feel better, (result)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark39>>2    'If it is true now that...'

We use will with i/when we are saying ‘if it is true now that..or ‘if we
know now that..

If Ann won't be here on Thursday, we'd better cancel the meeting.

If prices will really come down in a few months, I'm not going to buy
one now.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark40>>3    indirect questions: / don't know if...

We can use will after if in indirect questions (see 276).

I don't know if I'll be ready in time. (not ... if I'm ready in time:)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark41>>4    polite requests

We can use if+ will in polite requests. In this case, will is not a
future auxiliary; it means ‘are willing to^{1} (see 629.4).

If you will come this way, I'll show you your room.

If your mother will fill in this form, Fll prepare her ticket.

Would can be used to make a request even more polite.

If you would come this way...

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark42>>5    insistence

Stressed will can be used after if to suggest insistence.

If you WILL eat so much, it's not surprising you feel ill.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark43>>261 if (6): other points

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark44>>1 if... should; if... happen to

We can suggest that something is unlikely, or not particularly probable,
by using should (not would) in the //-clause.

If you should run into Peter, tell him he owes me a letter If... happen
to has a similar meaning.

If you happen to pass a supermarket, perhaps you could get some eggs.
Should and happen to can be used together.

If you should happen to finish early, give me a ring.

Would is not common in the main clause in these structures.

If he should be late, we'll have to start without him.

(not ... we'd have to start-without him.)    ►

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark45>>2    if... was/were to

This is another way of talking about unreal or imaginary future events.

If the boss was/were to come in now, we'd be in real trouble.

{- If the boss came ...)

What would we do if I was/were to lose my job?

It can be used to make a suggestion sound less direct, and so more
polite.

If you were to move your chair a bit, we could all sit down.

This structure is not normally used with verbs like be or know, which
refer to continuing situations.

If I knew her name ... (not If I were to know hername...)

For the difference between ivas and tvere after if, see 258.4.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark46>>3    if it was/were not for

This structure is used to say that one event or situation changes
everything. If it wasn't/weren't for his wife's money he'd never be a
director.

(= Without his wife's money ...)

If it wasn'tfweren't for the children, we could go skiing next week.

To talk about the past we use If it had not been for.

If it hadn't been for your help, I don't know what I'd have done.

But for can be used to mean 'if it were not for' or 'if it had not been
for'.

But for your help, I don^{f}t know what I'd have done.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark47>>4    leaving out if: conversational

If is sometimes left out at the beginning of a sentence in a
conversational style, especially when the speaker is making conditions
or threats.

You want to get in, you pay like everybody else. (= If you want...)

You touch me again, fll kick your teeth in.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark48>>5    leaving out if. formal
inversion-structures

In formal and literary styles, if can be dropped and an auxiliary verb
put before the subject. This happens mostly with were, had and should.

Were she my daughter,... (= If she were my daughter ...)

Had I realised what you intended, ... (= If I had realised ...)

Should you change your mind, ... (= If you should change ...)

Negatives are not contracted.

Had we not missed the plane, we would all have been killed in the crash.
(not Hadn't we-missed-...)

For other uses of inverted word order, see 302-303.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark49>>6    leaving out words after if

We sometimes leave out subject + be after if. Note the common fixed
expressions if necessary, if any, if anything, if ever, if in doubt.

I'll work late tonight if necessary. (= ... if it is necessary)

There is little if any good evidence for flying saucers.

I'm not angry. If anything, I feel a little surprised.

He seldom if ever travels abroad.

If in doubt, ask for help. (= If you are in doubt...)

If about to go on a long journey, try to have a good night's sleep.

For more details of ellipsis (structures with words left out), see
177-182.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark50>>7    if so and if not

After if we can use so and not instead of repeating a whole clause.

Are you free? If so, let's go out for a meal. (= ... If you are free
...)

I might see you tomorrow. If not, then it'll be Saturday. (= ... If I
don't see you tomorrow ...)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark51>>8    extra negative

An extra not is sometimes put into if clauses after expressions
suggesting doubt or uncertainty.

I wonder if we shouldn't ask the doctor to look at Mary.

(= I wonder if we should ask ...)

I wouldn't be surprised if she didn't get married soon.

(= ... if she got married soon.)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark52>>9    if... then

We sometimes construct sentences with if... then to emphasise that one
thing depends on another.

If she can't come to us, then we'll have to go and see her.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark53>>10    if meaning 'even if'

We can use if to mean 'even if (see 189.4).

I'll finish this job if it takes all night.

I wouldn't marry you if you were the last man in the world.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark54>>11    admitting facts with if

An if clause can be used to admit a fact when giving a reason for it.

If I'm a bit sleepy, it's because I was up all night.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark55>>12    if meaning 'I'm saying this in case'

//-clauses are quite often used to explain the purpose of a remark - to
suggest Tm saying this in case ..

There's some steak in the fridge if you're hungry.

If you want to go home, Anne's got your car keys.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark56>>13    if meaning 'although'

In a formal style, if can be used with a similar meaning to although.
This is common in the structure if+ adjective (with no verb). If is not
as definite as although; it can suggest that what is being talked about
is a matter of opinion, or not very important.

His style, if simple, is pleasant to read.

The profits, if a little lower than last year's, are still extremely
healthy:

The same kind of idea can be expressed with may... but (see 342).

His style may be simple, but it is pleasant to read.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark57>>262    if (7): other structures found in
spoken English

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark58>>1    would in both clauses

Conditional would is sometimes used in both clauses of an (/-sentence.
This is very informal, and is not usually written. It is common in
spoken American English.

It would be good if we'd get some rain.

How would we feel if this would happen to our family?

For if... would in polite requests, see 260.4.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark59>>2    ‘dhave...'dhave

In informal spoken English, {/-clauses referring to the past are
sometimes constructed with'd have. This is frequently considered
incorrect, but happens quite often in educated people's speech. It is
not normally written.

If I'd have known, I'd have told you.

It would have been funny if she'd have recognised him.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark60>>3    had've and would've

Instead of the contracted'd in these structures, full forms are
sometimes used for emphasis or in negatives. Both had and would occur.
The following are genuine examples taken from conversation.

I didn't know. But if I had've known ...

We would never have met if he hadn't have crashed into my car If I
would've had a gun, somebody might have got hurt.

If you wouldn't have phoned her we'd never have found out what was
happening.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark61>>4    mixed tenses

Sometimes a simple past tense is used with if where a past perfect would
be normal. This is more common in American English.

If I knew you were coming I'd have baked a cake.

If I had the money with me I would have bought you one.

If I didn't have my walking boots on I think I would have really hurt my
foot.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark62>>263    if (8): other words with the same
meaning

Many words and expressions can be used with a similar meaning to if and
often with similar structures. Some of the commonest are imagine (that),
suppose (that), supposing (that) (used to talk about what might happen),
and providing (that), provided (that), as/so long as, on condition
(that) (used to make conditions).

Imagine we could all fly. Wouldn't that be fun!

Supposing you'd missed the train. What would you have done?

You can borrow my bike providing/provided you bring it back.

I'll give you the day off on condition that you work on Saturday
morning. You're welcome to stay with us as/so long as you share the
expenses.

For suggestions with suppose, supposing and what if, see 571.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark63>>264    if I were you

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark64>>1    advice

We often use the structure If I were you ... to give advice.

I shouldn't worry if I were you.

If I were you, I'd get that car serviced.

If I was you is also possible. Some people consider it incorrect (see
258.4).

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark65>>2    I should/would...

Sometimes we leave out If I were you, and just use I should... or /
would... to give advice.

I shouldn't worry. I would get that car serviced.

In this case, I should/would is similar to you should/would.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark66>>265    if only

We can use If only.../ to say that we would like things to be different.
It means the same as I wish ... (see 630), but is more emphatic. The
clause with if only often stands alone, without a main clause. Tense use
is as follows:

a past to talk about the present

If only I knew more people! If only I was better-looking!

We can use were instead of was (see 258.4).

If only your father were here!

b would + infinitive (without to) to talk about the future

If only it would stop raining, we could go out.

If only somebody would smile!

c past perfect to talk about the past

If only she hadn't told the police, everything would have been all
right.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark67>>266    ill and sick

III and sick are both used to mean 'unwell*. (In American English ill is
less usual except in a formal style.)

George didn't come in last week because he was iU/sick.

Ill is not very common before a noun.

Vm looking after my sick mother. (More normal than ... my ill mother.)

Be sick can meant 'vomit' (= bring food up from the stomach).

I was sick three times in the night.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark68>>267    immediately, the moment etc:
conjunctions

In British English, immediately and directly can be used as
conjunctions, to mean ‘as soon as'.

Tell me immediately you have any news.

I knew something was wrong immediately I arrived.

Directly I walked in the door, I smelt smoke.

The moment (that), the instant (that), the second (that) and the minute
(that) can be used in the same way (in both British and American
English). Telephone me the moment (that) you get the results.

I loved you the instant (that) I saw you.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark69>>268    imperatives

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark70>>1    forms and use

In sentences like Come here, Be quiet, Have a drink or Don't worry about
it, the verb forms come, be, have and don't worry are called
‘imperatives'. Affirmative imperatives have the same form as the
infinitive without to; negative imperatives are constructed with do not
[don't).

Imperatives are used, for example, to tell or ask people to do things,
to make suggestions, to give advice or instructions, to encourage and
offer, and to express wishes for people's welfare.

Look in the mirror before you drive off.

Please do not lean out of the window.

Tell him you're not free this evening.

Try again - you nearly did it Have some more tea.

Enjoy your holiday.

An imperative followed by and or or can mean the same as an (f-clause.
Walk down our street any day and you'll see kids playing.

(= If you walk ...)

Shut up or ril lose my temper. (= If you don't shut up ...)

Don't do that again or you'll be in trouble.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark71>>2    emphatic imperative: Do sit down

We can make an emphatic imperative with do.

Do sit down. Do be more careful Do forgive me.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark72>>3    passive imperative: get vaccinated

To tell people to arrange for things to be done to them, we often use
get + past participle.

Get vaccinated as soon as you can.

For more about get as passive auxiliary, see 223.5.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark73>>4    do(n't) be

Although do is not normally used as an auxiliary with be (see 90), this
happens in negative imperatives.

Don't be silly!

Do be can begin emphatic imperatives.

Do be quiet!

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark74>>5    subject with imperative

The imperative does not usually have a subject, but we can use a noun or
pronoun to make it clear who we are speaking to.

Mary come here - everybody else stay where you are.

Somebody answer the phone. Relax, everybody.

You before an imperative can suggest emphatic persuasion or anger.

You just sit down and relax for a bit. You take your hands off me! Note
the word order in negative imperatives with pronoun subjects.

Don't you believe it. (not Yott-dor\^t-behieve-k.)

Don't anybody say a word. (not Anybody-don't say...)

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark75>>6    question tags

After imperatives, common question tags (see 487-488) are will you?
would you^{7}, can you? and could you?

Give me a hand, will you?

Wait here for a minute, would you?

Get me something to drink, can you?

Can't you and won't you are more emphatic.

Be quiet, can't you?    Sit down, won't you?

After negative imperatives, will yoU? is used.

Don't tell anybody, will you?

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark76>>7    word order with always and never

Always and never come before imperatives.

Always remember what I told you. (not Remember always...)

Never speak to me like that again.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark77>>8    let

English does not have a first-person imperative (used to suggest that T
or ‘we' should do something) or a third-person imperative (for other
people, not the hearer). These ideas are often expressed by a structure
with let.

Let me see. Do I need to go shopping today? Let's go home.

Let him wait

For more details of this structure, see 323.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark78>>269 in and into, on and onto: prepositions

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark79>>1 position and direction

We generally use in and on to talk about the positions of things - where
they are; and into and onto to talk about directions and destinations -
where things are going. Compare:    »>

-    A moment later the ball was in the goal

The ball rolled slowly into the goal, (not ... rolled slowly in the
goal:)

-    She was walking in the garden.    - The cat's on the roof again.

Then she walked into the house.    How does it get onto the roof?

Note that into and onto are normally written as single words. On to is
also possible in British English.

<<main-16.xhtml#bookmark80>>2    in and on for movement

After some verbs (e.g. throw, jump, push, put, fall) we can use both in
and into, or on and onto, to talk about directional movement. We prefer
into!onto when we think of the movement itself, and in Ion when we think
more of the end of the movement - the place where somebody or something
will be. Compare:

-    The children keep jumping into the flowerbeds.

Go and jump in the river.

-    In the experiment, we put glowing magnesium into jars of oxygen.

Could you put the ham in the fridge?

-    He was trying to throw his hat onto the roof Throw another log on
the fire.

We use in and on after sit down and arrive.

He sat down in the armchair, and I sat down on the floor, (not He sat
down into... or bsat down onto..)

We arrive in Athens at midday, (not usually We arrive into Athens...)

For arrive at..see 81.

<<main-17.xhtml>>

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark0>>3    into for change

We normally use into after verbs suggesting change.

When she kissed the frog, it changed into a handsome prince.

(not .. .- changed in a handsome prince.)

Can you translate this into Chinese? (not .. . translate this in
Chinese?) Cut can be followed by into or in.

Cut the onion in(to) small pieces.

And note the expression in half.

I broke it in half (not ... into-hatfi)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark1>>4    in and on as adverbs

In and on are used as adverbs for both position and movement.

I stayed in last night. Come in! (not Come into!)

What have you got on? Put your coat on.

For the difference between in and to, see 270.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark2>>270 in and to

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark3>>1 go to school in... etc

After expressions like go to school, go to work, we use in, not to, to
say where the school, work etc is located.

He went to school in BristoL (not He went to school to Bristol)

At is also possible. (For the difference between in and at, see 81.)

She went to university at/in Oxford.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark4>>2 arrive etc

We use in (or at), not to, after arrive and land.

We arrive in Bangkok on Tuesday morning. (not We arrive to Bangkok..)
What time do we land at Barcelona? (not ... land-to-Bareel&na?)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark5>>271 in case and if

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark6>>1    precautions

In case is mostly used to talk about precautions - things which we do in
order to be ready for possible future situations.

I always take an umbrella in case it rains. (= ... because it might
rain.)

To talk about the future, we use a present tense after in case (see
580). jVve bought a chicken in case your mother stays to lunch (not ...
in case your-mother will stay...)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark7>>2    in case ... should

We often use should + infinitive (with a similar meaning to might) after
in case. This adds the meaning 'by chance^{1}.

I've bought a chicken in case your mother should stay to lunch.

This structure is especially common in sentences about the past.

I wrote down her address in case I should forget it.

The meaning ‘by chance' can also be expressed by (should) happen to.

We took our swimming things in case we happened to find a pool (or ...
in case we should happen to find a pool)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark8>>3    in case and if

In case and (fare normally used in quite different ways.

‘Do A in case B happens* means ‘Do A (first) because B might happen
later'. ‘Do A if B happens' means ‘Do A if B has already happened'.
Compare:

-    Let's buy a bottle of wine in case Roger comes.

(- Let's buy some wine now because Roger might come later.)

Let's buy a bottle of wine if Roger comes. (= We'll wait and see. If
Roger comes, then we'll buy the wine. If he doesn't we won't.)

-    I'm taking an umbrella in case it rains.

I'll open the umbrella if it rains, (not I'll open the umbrella in case
it rains.)

-    People insure their houses in case they catch fire. (not ... if
they catch fire.) People telephone the fire brigade if their houses
catch fire: (not ..telephone

.. .-m-ease- their houses catch fire.)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark9>>4    in case of

The prepositional phrase in case of has a wider meaning than the
conjunction in case, and can be used in similar situations to if In case
of fire, break glass. (= If there is a fire ...)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark10>>272    in spite of

In spite of is used as a preposition. In spite of+ noun means more or
less the same as although + clause.

We went out in spite of the rain. (= ... although it was raining.)

We understood him in spite of his accent.

(= ... although he had a strong accent.)

In spite of is the opposite of because of Compare:

She passed her exams in spite of her teacher. (She had a bad teacher.)

She passed her exams because of her teacher. (She had a good teacher.)

In spite of can be followed by an -ing form.

In spite of having a headache I enjoyed the film.

In spite of cannot be followed directly by a that-clause. Instead, we
can use in spite of the fact that.

He is good company, in spite of the fact that he talks all the time.

This is rather heavy: although means the same, and is more common.

In more formal English, despite can be used in the same way as in spite
of

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark11>>273    indeed

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark12>>1    very... indeed

Indeed is often used to emphasise very with an adjective or adverb.

I was very pleased indeed to hear from you.

He was driving very fast indeed. Thank you very much indeed. Indeed is
unusual in this sense without very, and is not normally used after
extremely or quite.

(not He was driving-fast indeed.)

(not He was driving quite/extremelyfast-mdeed.)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    indeed with verb

Indeed can also be used after be or an auxiliary verb in order to
suggest confirmation or emphatic agreement. This is rather formal. It is
common in short answers (see 517).

We are indeed interested in your offer, and would be glad to have
prices. It's cold. \^ It is indeed.

Henry made a fool of himself. -He did indeed.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark14>>274    indirect speech (1): introduction

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark15>>1 direct and indirect speech

When we report people's words, thoughts, beliefs etc, we can give the
exact words (more or less) that were said, or that we imagine were
thought. This kind of structure is called 'direct speech' (though it is
used for reporting thoughts as well as speech).

So he said, 7 want to go home,' and just walked out.

She asked ^{r}What do you want?'

And then I thought, Well, does he really mean it?'

We can also make somebody's words or thoughts part of our own sentence,
using conjunctions (e.g. that), and changing pronouns, tenses and other
words where necessary. This kind of structure is called 'indirect
speech' or ‘reported speech'.

So he said that he wanted to go home, and just walked out She asked what
I wanted.

And then I wondered whether he really meant it.

These two structures cannot normally be mixed.

She said to me 7 have got no money', or She said to me that she had got
no money. but not She said to-me that I have got no money.

For punctuation in direct speech, see 476, 478.

For reporting verbs and word order, see 156.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark16>>2    change of situation

Words that are spoken or thought in one place by one person may be
reported in another place at a different time, and perhaps by another
person. Because of this, there are often grammatical differences between
direct and indirect speech. For example:

bill (on Saturday evening): I don't like this party. J want to go home
now. PETER (on Sunday morning): Bill said that he didn't like the party,
and he wanted to go home.

These differences are mostly natural and logical, and it is not
necessary to learn complicated rules about indirect speech in English.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark17>>3    pronouns

A change of speaker may mean a change of pronoun.

In the above example, Bill says I to refer to himself. Peter, talking
about what Bill said, naturally uses he.

Bill said that he didn't like ... (not Bill said that-1 didn't like...)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark18>>4    'here and now' words

A change of place and time may mean changing or dropping words like
here, this, now, today. Peter, reporting what Bill said, does not use
this and now because he is no longer at the party.

Bill said that he didn't like the party ...

(not Bill saidrthat he didn't like this party...)

...he wanted to go home, (not .. .-to go home now:)

Some other ‘here and now* words: next, last, yesterday, tomorrow.
Compare:

-    DIRECT: I'll be back next week.

INDIRECT: She said she'd be back the next week, but I never saw her
again.

-    direct: Ann got her licence last Tuesday.

IN D1R ECT; He said Ann had got her licence the Tuesday before.

-    DIRECT: I had an accident yesterday.

INDIRECT: He said he'd had an accident the day before.

-    DIRECT: We'll be there tomorrow.

INDIRECT: They promised to be there the next day.    +

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark19>>5    tenses

A change of time may mean a change of tense.

Bill said that he didn't like the party... (not Bill said that he
doesn't like the party... - when Peter is talking, the party is
finished.)

For details of tense changes in indirect speech, see 275.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark20>>6    dropping that

The conjunction that is often dropped, especially after common reporting
verbs (e.g. say, think) in informal speech. For more details, see 584.

She said (that) shed had enough I think (that) you're probably right.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark21>>275 indirect speech (2): tenses

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark22>>1    past reporting verbs: He said he didn't
like the party.

When we report what somebody said or thought, it is usually natural to
use different tenses from the original speaker (because we are talking
at a different time).

BILL (on Saturday evening): I don't like this party. I want to go home
now. (present tenses)

PETER (on Sunday morning): Bill said that he didn*t like the party, and
he wanted to go home, (past tenses)

It would be strange for Peter to say on Sunday 'Bill said that he
doesn't like the party', just as it would be strange for Peter to say,
on Sunday, 'Bill doesn't like the party yesterday and goes home*. The
tenses used in indirect speech are usually just the tenses that are
natural for the situation - see the examples below.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark23>>2    typical tense changes after past
reporting verbs

will -> would

DIRECT: The exam will be difficult indirect: They said that the exam
would be difficult simple present -> simple past DIRECT: I need help.

INDIRECT: She thought she needed help. present progressive -> past
progressive DIRECT: My English is getting better.

IN DIR ECT: I knew my English was getting better. present perfect -+
past perfect

DIRECT: This has been a wonderful holiday.

1NDIRECT: She told me that it had been a wonderful holiday. past -» past
perfect

DIRECT: Ann grew up in Kenya.

INDIRECT: I found out that Ann had grown up in Kenya, can -» could

DIRECT: I can fly!

INDIRECT: Poor chap - he thought he could fly:

may -* might

DIRECT: We may come back early.

INDIRECT: They said they might come back early.

Past perfect tenses do not change.

DIRECT: I arrived late because I had lost the address.

IN DIR ECT: He said he had arrived late because he had lost the address.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark24>>3    would, could etc: no change

Past modal verbs are usually unchanged in indirect speech.

DIRECT: It would be nice if we could meet IN DIR ect : He said it would
be nice if we could meet

For more details, see 278.3.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark25>>4    I told them I was British

After past reporting verbs, we usually change the original tenses even
if the things the original speaker said are still true.

-    DIRECT: Vm British.

INdi RECT: I told the police I was British (The speaker still is
British.)

-    direct: You can use my car today.

indirect: Your mother said I could use her car today. Have you got the
keys?

-    DIRECT: How old are you?

INDIRECT: Didn't you hear me? I asked how old you were.

-    direct: That is my seat.

INDIRECT: Sorry_{t} I didn't realise this was your seat However, it is
often also possible to keep the original speaker's tenses in these
cases.

Didn't you hear me? I asked how old you are.

For details, see 278.2.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark26>>5    He says, Vll tell her etc.

After present, future and present perfect reporting verbs, tenses are
usually the same as in the original (because there is no important
change of time).

-    DIRECT: I don't want to play any more.

INDIRECT: He says he doesn't want to play any more.

-    DI RECT: We need some help.. indirect: I'll tell her you need some
help.

-    DIRECT: Taxes will be raised.

IN direct: The government has announced that taxes will be raised.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark27>>276 indirect speech (3): questions and
answers

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark28>>1 word order: I asked where Alice was

In reported questions the subject normally comes before the verb in
standard English, and auxiliary do is not used.

-    DIRECT: Where's Alice?

IN DIR ECT: I asked where Alice was. (not ... where was-Alice:)    »

-    DIRECT: When are you leaving?

indirect: He wanted to know when I was leaving, (not ... when was 1
leaving:)

-    DIRECT: What do I need?

INDIRECT: She asked what she needed, (not ... what-did she-need:)

-    DIRECT: Where are the President and his wife staying?

1 n DI RECT: I asked where the President and his wife were staying.

(not Where were-staying-.. .)

The same structure is used for reporting the answers to questions.

/ knew how they felt, (not ... how did they feel)

Nobody told me why I had to sign the paper (not ... why did I have to
sign ...)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark29>>2    no question marks

Question marks are not used in reported questions.

We asked where the money was. (not ... where the money was?)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark30>>3    yes/no questions: He asked if...

Yesfno questions are reported with if or whether (for the difference,
see 621). The driver asked ifJwhether I wanted the town centre.

I don't know ifJwhether I can help you.

In reported questions, we do not use a present tense after if to talk
about the future.

Tm not sure if I'll see her tomorrow. (not ... if I see her tomorrow:)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark31>>4    say and tell: answers, not questions

Say and tell are not used to report questions.

(not The driver said whether I wanted the town centre.)

But say and tell can introduce the answers to questions.

Please say whether you want the town centre.

He never says where he's going. I told her what time it was.

For the difference between say and tell, see 504.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark32>>277 indirect speech (4): infinitives

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark33>>1 He promised to write

Speech relating to actions (e.g. promises, agreements, orders, offers,
requests, advice and suggestions) is often reported with infinitives.

He promised to write. She agreed to wait for me.

Ann has offered to baby-sit tonight.

Object + infinitive is common with ask, advise, tell and order (but not
with promise or offer).

I told Andrew to be carefid.

The landlady has asked us to be quiet after nine o'clock.

I advise you to think again before you decide.

The policeman told me not to park there.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark34>>2    He asked her how to ...

The structure question word + infinitive is common (see 286). It often
corresponds to a direct question with should.

He asked her how to make a white sauce. ('How should I make a white
sauce?')

Don't tell me what to do. I've forgotten where to put the keys.

I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark35>>3    suggest, say: infinitives not used

We do not use infinitive structures after suggest (see 570) or (usually)
after say. However, after these and many other verbs, instructions etc
can be reported with tfiaf-clauses, usually with modal verbs (see
353-354).

I suggested that he should try the main car park, (not I suggested him
to try ...)

The policeman said that I mustn't park there. (not The policemen-said me
not to park there.)

I told Andrew that he ought to be careful Subjunctives (see 567) and
-ing forms are also possible after some verbs, e.g. suggest.

I suggested that he try the main car park.

I suggested trying the main car park

For the structures that are possible after particular verbs, see a good
dictionary.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark36>>278 indirect speech (5): advanced points

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark37>>1    reporting past tenses

In indirect speech, a speaker's past tenses are often reported using
past perfect tenses.

-    DIRECT: Vve just written to John.

IN direct: She told me she had just written to John.

-    direct: I saw Penny at the theatre a couple of days ago.

I ndirect: In his letteri he said he'd seen Penny at the theatre a
couple of days before.

However, past perfect tenses are not always used, especially if the time
relationships are clear without a change from past to past perfect.

This man on TV said that dinosaurs were around for 250 million years.

(not. ...-that-dinos€turs~hadr-been-around...)

I told you John (had) phoned this morning, didn't I?

We were glad to hear you (had) enjoyed your trip to Denmark.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    reporting present and future tenses

If somebody talked about a situation that has still not changed - that
is to say, if the original speaker's present and future are still
present and future - a reporter can often choose whether to keep the
original speaker's tenses or to change them, after a past reporting
verb. Both structures are common.

-    direct: The earth goes round the sun.

indirect: He proved that the earth goesfwent round the sun.    »

-    DIRECT: How old are you?

indirect: Are you deaf? I asked how old you arefwere.

-    di RECT: It will be windy tomorrow.

indirect: The forecast said it will/would be windy tomorrow.

We are more likely to change the original speaker's tenses if we do not
agree with what he/she said, if we are not certain of its truth, or if
we wish to make it clear that the information comes from the original
speaker, not from ourselves.

The Greeks thought that the sun went round the earth, (not ... that the
sun goes round-the-earth:)

She just said she was fourteen! I don't believe her for a moment.

He announced that profits were higher than forecast

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    modal verbs in indirect speech

The modals would, should, could, might, ought and must are usually
unchanged after past reporting verbs in indirect speech. This is also
true of needn't (see 366) and had better (see 230).

-    direct: It would be nice if I could see you again.

IN Di RECT: He said it would be nice if he could see me again.

-    DIRECT: It might be too late.

IN di RECT: I was afraid that it might be too late.

-    DIRECT: It must be pretty late. I really must go.

INDIRECT: She said it must be pretty late and she really must go.

-    DIRECT: You needn't pretend to be sorry. indirect: / said he
needn't pretend...

First-person shall and should may be reported as would in indirect
speech (because of the change of person).

DIRECT: We shaWshould be delighted to come.

INDIRECT: They said they would be delighted to come.

For had to as a past of must, see 358, 360.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark40>>4    reporting ^{J}Shall /...?'

There are different ways of reporting questions beginning Shall /...?,
depending on whether the speaker is asking for information or making an
offer.

-    DIRECT: Shall I be needed tomorrow? (information)

IN DIRECT: He wants to know if he will be needed tomorrow.

-    DIRECT: Shall I carry your bag? (offer)

INDIRECT: He wants to know if he shouldican carry your bag.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark41>>5    conditionals

After past reporting verbs, sentences with if and would are usually
unchanged. DIRECT: It would be best if we started early.

INDIRECT: He said it would be best if they started early.

However, //-sentences that refer to 'unreal' situations can change as
follows. DIRECT: If I had any money I'd buy you a drink.

INDIRECT: She said if she had had any money she would have bought me a
drink (or She said if she had any money she would buy...)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark42>>6    negative questions

Negative questions often express emotions such as surprise or enthusiasm
(see 368), and these are usually reported in special ways.

-    DIRECT: Don't the children like ice-cream?

INDIRECT: She was surprised that the children didn't like ice-cream,.

(not She asked if the children didn't like ice-eream.)

-    DIRECT: Isn't she lovely!

INDIRECT: I remarked how lovely she was. (not I asked if she wasn't
lovely.)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark43>>7    word order with what, who and which

Questions beginning who!what!which + be can ask for a subject or a
complement. Compare:

Who is the best player here? (This asks for a subject: a possible answer
is John is the best player here.)

What is the time? (This asks for a complement: a possible answer is The
time is 4.30, not 4.30 is-tke-time:)

When we report the first kind of question (where who! what! which + be
asks for a subject), two word orders are possible.

-    DIRECT: Who's the best player here?

INDIRECT: She asked me who was the best player.

She asked me who the best player was.

-    DIRECT: What's the matter?

IN DI RECT: I asked what was the matter.

I asked what the matter was.

-    DIRECT: Which is my seat?

INDIRECT: She wondered which was her seat.

She wondered which her seat was.

This does not happen when who! what! which asks for a complement.
DIRECT: What's the time?

INDIRECT: She asked what the time was. (not usually She asked what was
the time.)

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark44>>8    She's written I don't know how many
books

Complicated structures can be produced in informal speech when reporting
expressions are put into sentences with question-word clauses or
relatives. She's written I don't know how many books.

He's gone I don't know where.

This is the man who Ann said would tell us about the church.

For more about relative structures of this kind, see 498.15.

For more about embedding (clauses inside clauses) in general, see 515.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark45>>9    indirect speech without reporting verbs

In newspaper, radio and TV reports, reports of parliamentary debates,
records of conferences, minutes of meetings etc, the indirect speech
construction is often used with very few reporting verbs. The use of
tenses is enough to make it clear that a text is a report.    »

The Managing Director began his address to the shareholders by
summarising the results for the year. Profits on the whole had been
high, though one or two areas had been disappointing. It was, however,
important to maintain a high level of investment, and he was sure that
the shareholders would appreciate ...

In literary narrative, similar structures are common. The reported
speech may be made more vivid by using direct question structures and
‘here and now' words.

At breakfast, Peter refused to go to school Why should he spend all his
time sitting listening to idiots? What use was all that stuff anyway? If
he stayed at home he could read books. He might even learn something
useful His father, as usual, was unsympathetic. Peter had to go to
school, by damn, and he had better get moving now, or there'd be
trouble.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark46>>279 infinitives (1): introduction

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    forms

Infinitives are forms like (to) write, (to) stand. Unlike verb tenses
(e.g. writes, stood), infinitives do not usually show the actual times
of actions or events. They usually refer to actions and events in a more
general way, rather like -ing forms. (See 293-300).

Infinitives are generally used with to; for infinitives without to, see
281. Besides simple infinitives like (to) write, there are also
progressive infinitives (e.g. (to) be writing), perfect infinitives
(e.g. (to) have written) and passive infinitives (e.g. (to) be written).
For details of the various forms, see 280.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    use

Infinitives have many functions. An infinitive can be used, for example,
after do or a modal auxiliary verb as part of a verb phrase.

Do you think she's ready?

We must get some more light bulbs.

An infinitive can also be used, alone or with other words:

•    as the subject or complement of a clause (see 290)

To watch him eating really gets on my nerves.

The main thing is to relax. It*s nice to talk to you.

•    as the object or complement of a verb, adjective or noun (see
282-285)

I don't want to talk, Tm anxious to contact your brother.

You have the right to remain silent.

•    to express a person's purpose (see 289)

He came to London to look for work.

For full details of the uses of infinitives, see the following sections.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark49>>280 infinitives (2): forms

Besides the ordinary infinitive (e.g. (to) go, (to) work), there are
also progressive, perfect and passive forms.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark50>>1    progressive infinitive: (to) be ...ing

Like other progressive forms (see 470), progressive infinitives suggest
that actions and events are / were / will be continuing around the time
that we are talking about.

Its nice to be sitting here with you.

I noticed that he seemed to be smoking a lot.

This time tomorrow fll be lying on the beach.

(future progressive tense: see 220)

Why's she so late? She can't still be working.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark51>>2    perfect infinitive: (to) have + past
participle

Perfect infinitives can have the same kind of meaning as perfect tenses
(see 427) or past tenses (see 421-422).

It's nice to have finished work (= It's nice that I have finished.)

I'm sorry not to have come on Thursday. (= ... that I didn't come ...)

We often use perfect infinitives to talk about ‘unreal' past events:
things that did not happen, or that may not have happened (see 288).

I meant to have telephoned, but I forgot.

You should have told me you were coming.

I may have left my umbrella at the restaurant.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark52>>3    passive infinitive: (to) be + past
participle

Passive infinitives have the same kind of meaning as other passive forms
(see 412).

There's a lot of work to be done. She ought to be told about it.

That window must be repaired before tonight.

Sometimes active and passive infinitives can have similar meanings,
especially after a noun or be (see 287).

There's a lot of work to do / to be done.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark53>>4    combinations

Perfect progressive and perfect passive infinitives are common.

I'd like to have been sitting there when she walked in.

They were lucky - they could have been killed Progressive passive
infinitives are possible but unusual.

What would you like to be doing right now? ~l'd like to be being
massaged. Progressive perfect passive infinitives (e.g. It must have
been being built at the time) are very unusual.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark54>>5    negative forms

Negative infinitives are normally made by putting not before the
infinitive. Try not to be late, (not usually Try to not be late, or
Try-to-donrt-be-late.) You were silly not to have locked your car.

He's very busy. Tm afraid he can't be disturbed    ►

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark55>>6    to

The marker to is normally used before infinitives (e.g. He wanted to
go). Note that this to is not a preposition; after the preposition to we
use -ing forms (see 298.2). For infinitives without to (e.g. She let him
go), see 281.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark56>>7    split infinitive

A ‘split infinitive* is a structure in which to is separated from the
rest of the infinitive by an adverb.

I'd like to realty understand philosophy.

He began to slowly get up off the floor.

Split infinitive structures are quite common in English, especially in
an informal style. Some people consider them incorrect or careless, and
avoid them if possible by putting the adverb in another position.

He began slowly to get up off the floor.

For details of the use of infinitives, see the following sections.

For the use of to instead of a whole infinitive (e.g. Yd like to), see
182.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark57>>281 infinitives (3): without to

We usually put to before the infinitive (e.g. I want to know, It's nice
to see you). But we use the infinitive without to in some cases.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark58>>1    after modal auxiliary verbs

After the modal auxiliary verbs will, shall, would, should, can, could,
may, might and must, we use the infinitive without to.

I must go now. (not / must to go now.)

Can you help me?    Do you think she might be joking?

I would rather go alone. She will probably be elected.

We also use the infinitive without to after had better (see 230), and
sometimes after need and dare (see 366, 151).

You'd better see what she wants.

She needn^{f}t do the washing up. I daren't go out at night.

The fo-infinitive is used after ought (see 403).

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark59>>2    after let, make, hear etc

Certain verbs are followed by object + infinitive without to. They
include let, make, see, hear, feel, watch and notice.

She lets her children stay up very late, (not Ske-lets-her children to
stay...

or She iets her children staying...)

I made them give me the money back I didn't see you come in.

We both heard him say that I was leaving.

Did you feel the earth move?

Help can also be used in this way (see 244).

Could you help me (to) unload the car?

This structure is also possible with have (see 238) and know (see 313).

Have Mrs Hansen come in, please, (especially AmE)

I've never known him (to) pay for a drink

In passive versions of these structures (with make, see, hear, help and
know) the infinitive with to is used.

He was made to pay back the money.

She was heard to say that she disagreed.

For more information about structures with let, see 322. For make, see
335.

For more information about see, hear, watch etc + object + verb, see
242.

For verbs that are followed by object + to-infinitive, see 283.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark60>>3    after why (not)

We can introduce questions and suggestions with why (not) + infinitive
without to. For more details, see 628.

Why pay more at other shops? We have the lowest prices.

Why stand up if you can sit down? Why sit down if you can lie down?
You're looking tired. Why not take a holiday?

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark61>>4    after and, or, except, but, than, as
and like

When two infinitive structures are joined by and, or, except, but, than,
as or like, the second is often without to.

Vd like to lie down and go to sleep.

Do you want to have lunch now or wait till later?

We had nothing to do except look at the cinema posters.

Vm ready to do anything but work on a farm.

It's easier to do it yourself than explain to somebody else how to do
it.

Its as easy to smile as frown.

I have to feed the animals as well as look after the children.

Why don't you do something useful like clean the flat?

Rather than is usually followed by an infinitive without to.

Rather than wait any more, I decided to go home by taxi.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark62>>5    after do

Expressions like All I did was_{t} What I do is etc can be followed by
an infinitive without ro.

All I did was (to) give him a little push.

What a fire-door does is (to) delay the spread of a fire.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark63>>282 infinitives (4): after verbs

After many non-auxiliary verbs, we can use the infinitives of other
verbs.

It's beginning to rain.

I don't want to see you again.

She seems to be crying.

I expect to have finished by tomorrow evening.

The car needs to be cleaned    +

Common verbs that can be followed by infinitives (for more detailed
entries on some of these, see Index):

| afford         | begin      | fail       | intend    | prefer     | seem      |
| agree          | care       | forget     | learn     | prepare    | start     |
| appear         | choose     | go on      | like      | pretend    | swear     |
| arrange        | consent    | happen     | love      | propose    | trouble   |
| ask            | continue   | hate       | manage    | promise    | try       |
| attempt        | dare       | help       | mean      | refuse     | want      |
| (can't) bear   | decide     | hesitate   | neglect   | regret     | wish      |
| beg            | expect     | hope       | offer     | remember   |           |

Some of these verbs can be followed by object + infinitive (e.g. I want
her to be happy). For details, see 283. A few verbs are followed by verb
+ for + object + infinitive (e.g. I arranged far her to have violin
lessons). For details of these, see 291.7.

After some verbs we can use not only an infinitive but also an -ing form
(sometimes with a difference of meaning). For details, see 299.

After some verbs, it is not possible to use an infinitive. Many of these
can be followed by -mg forms (see 296).

I enjoy sailing, (not

For perfect infinitives after verbs, see 288.

For have + infinitive (e.g. I have to go now), see 239.

For be + infinitive (e.g. You are to start tomorrow), see 91.

For information about the structures that are possible with a particular
verb, see a good dictionary.

<<main-17.xhtml#bookmark64>>283 infinitives (5): I want you to listen

Many verbs are followed by object + infinitive.

I want you to listen.

With some verbs (e.g. want, allow), a that-clause is impossible.

She didn't want me to go. (not She didn't want that I go.)

They don't allow people to smoke, (not They don't allow that
people-smoke.) I didn't ask you to pay for the meal, (not I didn't
ashthat-you pay for the

jaa.aaj \

Ttttxtt.)

Some common verbs that can be followed by object + infinitive:

| advise         | forbid                | love        | request               |
| allow          | force                 | mean        | teach                 |
| ask            | get (see also 223)    | need        | tell                  |
| (can't) bear   | hate                  | oblige      | tempt                 |
| beg            | help (see also 244)   | order       | trouble               |
| cause          | instruct              | permit      | want                  |
| command        | intend                | persuade    | warn                  |
| compel         | invite                | prefer      | wish (see also 630)   |
| encourage      | leave                 | recommend   |                       |
| expect         | like                  | remind      |                       |

Let, make, see, hear, feel, watch, notice, have, and sometimes know and
help are followed by object + infinitive without to (see 281).

Why won't you let me explain?

I heard her open the door and go out.

Some verbs cannot be followed by object + infinitive; for example
suggest I suggested that she should go home. (not
J-suggested-heMo-go-heme.) Many of the verbs listed above can also be
followed by other structures such as an -ingform or a tfiaf-clause. For
complete information, see a good dictionary.

For passive structures with these verbs, see 418.

For verbs that are followed by for + object + infinitive (e.g. I
arranged for her to go early), see 291.7 For object + to be-1-
complement after verbs of thinking and feeling (e.g. / considered him to
be an excellent choice), see 607.

For structures with take (e.g. The ferry took two hours to unload), see
576.

<<main-18.xhtml>>

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark0>>284 infinitives (6): after adjectives

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark1>>1    reactions and feelings: pleased to see
you

Infinitives are often used after adjectives describing reactions and
feelings. I'm pleased to see you.

John was surprised to get Ann's letter.

She's anxious to go home.

We're happy to he here.

I was shocked to see how ill he was.

Most people are afraid to hear the truth about themselves.

Not all adjectives of this kind are followed by infinitives. Some are
followed by preposition + -ing form (see 297), or by that-clauses (see
19). Some adjectives (e.g. afraid, sure) can be followed by either an
infinitive or an -ing form, often with a difference of meaning: for
details, see 299.

For structures with for (e.g. She's anxious for the children to go
home), see 291-293.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    other adjectives: certain to win

Besides adjectives referring to reactions and feelings, many other
adjectives can be followed by infinitives. Examples: right, wrong,
stupid, certain (see 299.15), welcome, careful, due, fit, able (see 3),
likely (see 327), lucky.

We were right to start early. Be careful not to wake the children.

I was stupid to believe him. It's very likely to rain.

She's certain to win.    You were lucky not to be killed

You're welcome to stay as long as you like.

For structures with preparatory it (e.g. It is important to get enough
sleep), see 446.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    superlatives etc: the oldest athlete to
win ...

Superlatives can be followed by an infinitive structure. The meaning is
similar to an identifying relative clause (see 495).

He's the oldest athlete ever to win an Olympic gold medal

(= ... who has ever won ...)    ►

This structure is also common with first, second, third etc, next, last
and only. Who was the first person to climb Everest without oxygen?

The next to arrive was Mrs Patterson.

She's the only scientist to have won three Nobel prizes.

This structure is only possible when the noun with the superlative has a
subject relationship with the infinitive.

Is this the first time that you have stayed here?

(not ...-thefirst-time-for-yeu-to-stay-here: Time is not the subject of
stay.)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark4>>4 easy to please

Some adjectives can be used with infinitives in a special structure, in
which the subject of the clause is really the object of the infinitive.
Examples are easy, hard, difficult, impossible, good, ready, and
adjectives after enough and too. He's easy to please.

(= To please him is easy. OR It is easy to please him.)

Japanese is difficult for Europeans to learn.

(= It is difficult for Europeans to leam Japanese.)

His theory is impossible to understand

(= It is impossible to understand his theory.)

Are these berries good to eat? The apples were ripe enough to pick.

The letters are ready to sign, The box was too heavy to lift.

The structure often ends with a preposition (see 452).

She's nice to talk to.    He's very easy to get on with.

It's not a bad place to live in.

There is no object pronoun after the infinitive or preposition in these
cases. Cricket is not very interesting to watch. (not Cricket is not
very interesting to watch" it.)

She's nice to talk to. (not She's nice to talk to her.)

When the adjective is before a noun, the infinitive is usually after the
noun.

It's a good wine to keep, (not Its a good to keep wine.)

Easy, difficult and impossible cannot be used in this structure when the
subject of the clause is the subject of the following verb.

She has difficulty learning maths, (not She is difficult
to-learn-maths.)

Iron rusts easily, (not Iron is easy to rust.)

This material can't possibly catch fire, (not This-material is
impossible to cateh-fire.)

For more about enough/too + adjective + infinitive, see 187, 595.

For so + adjective + Infinitive (e.g. Would you be so kind as to help
me?), see 538.8.

For information about the structures that are possible with a particular
adjective, see a good dictionary.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark5>>285 infinitives (7): after nouns and pronouns

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark6>>1 nouns related to verbs: no wish to change

We can use infinitives after some nouns which are related to verbs that
can be followed by infinitives (e.g. wish, decide, need).

I have no wish to change. (= 1 do not wish to change.)

I told her about my decision to leave. (= 1 told her that 1 had decided
to leave.)

Is there any need to ask Joyce? (= Do we need to ask Joyce?)

Not all nouns can be followed by infinitives in this way.

I hate the thought of getting old. (not ... the-tkought to get-okh)

And note that not all related verbs and nouns are followed by the same
structures. Compare:

-    I hope to arrive.    - I do not intend to return.

There's no hope of arriving.    I have no intention of returning.

-    She prefers to live alone.

I understand her preference for living alone.

Unfortunately there is no easy way to decide which structures are
possible after a particular noun. It is best to check in a good
dictionary.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark7>>2    nouns related to adjectives: You were a
fool to agree

We can also use infinitives after some nouns which are related to
adjectives, or which have an adjectival sense.

You were a fool to agree.. (= You were foolish to agree.)

What a nuisance to have to go! (= How annoying to have to go!)

It's a pleasure to see you again. (= It's pleasant to see you again.)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark8>>3    purpose: a key to open the door

An infinitive can be used after a noun, or an indefinite pronoun like
something, to explain the purpose of a particular thing: what it does,
or what somebody does with it. The noun or pronoun can be the subject of
the infinitive.

Have you got a key to open this door? (The key will open the door.)

It was a war to end all wars.

I'd like something to stop my toothache.

The noun or pronoun can also be the object of the infinitive.

I need some more books to read. (I will read the books.)

Is there any milk to put on the cornflakes?

Did you tell her which bus to take? Is there anything to drink?

If the noun or pronoun is the object of the infinitive, we do not add an
object pronoun after the infinitive.

I gave her a paper to read, (not ... a paper to read it)

He needs a place to live in. (not ... a place to live in it:)

Somelany/ nowhere can also be followed by infinitives.

The kids want somewhere to practise their music.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark9>>4    enough, too much etc

Quantifiers like enough, too much! many! little!few, plenty etc are
often followed by noun + infinitive.

There was enough light to see what I was doing:

There's too much snow (for us) to be able to drive.

We've got plenty of time to see the British Museum.

Enough is often dropped before room and time.

There's hardly (enough) room to breathe in here.

Do you think we'll have (enough) time to do some shopping?    +

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark10>>5    infinitive with preposition: a friend
to play with

A noun can be followed by infinitive + preposition.

Mary needs a friend to play with.

He's looking for a flat to live in.

In a very formal style, another structure is possible: noun +
preposition + whom! which + infinitive.

Mary needs a friend with whom to play.

He's looking for a place in which to live.

This is not possible when there is no preposition. One cannot say, for
example, / need-a book which to read.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark11>>6    the life to come etc

In expressions like the life to come (= life after death), the world to
come, his wife to be (= his future wife), the infinitive has a future
meaning, and is similar to a relative clause with be (= the life/world
that is to come, etc.)

For infinitives used to talk about people's purposes, see 289.

For passive infinitives (e.g. There's work to be done.), see 287.

For for + object + infinitive (e.g. Is there any need for us to stay?),
see 291.5.

For infinitives after first, next, last or superlative + noun (e.g. the
first tvoman to climb Everest), see 284.3.

For more about structures with prepositions at the end, see 452.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark12>>286 infinitives (8): who to , what to ...
etc

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark13>>1    indirect questions: Tell us what to do

In indirect speech (see 277.2), we can use an infinitive after the
question words who_{%} what, where etc (but not usually why). This
structure expresses ideas such as obligation and possibility.

I wonder who to invite. (= ... who I should invite.)

Tell us what to do.

Can you show me how to get to the station? (= ... how I can get to the
station?)

I don't know where to put the car. Tell me when to pay.

I can't decide whether to answer her letter.

(but not I-can'-t-understand-why to do it)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark14>>2    direct questions: What shall we do?

We do not usually begin a direct question with How to...?, What to ...?
etc. After question words, we often use shall and should.

How shall I tell her? (not How to tell her?)

What shall we do? (not What to do?)

Who should I pay? (not Who to pay?)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark15>>3    titles

How to ..., What to ... etc are often found as tides for instructions,
information leaflets, books etc. (Note: these are not questions.)

HOW TO IMPROVE YOUR PRONUNCIATION WHAT TO DO IF FIRE BREAKS OUT

For questions beginning Why (not) + infinitive, see 628.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark16>>287 infinitives (9): active and passive
infinitive with similar meaning

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark17>>1    obligation

We can use noun + infinitive to talk about obligation - things that
people have to do. Active and passive Infinitives are often both
possible.

There's a lot of work to do / to be done.

There are six letters to post / to be posted

Give me the names of the people to contact f to be contacted

The people to interview f to be interviewed are in the next room.

We prefer active infinitives if we are thinking more about the person
who will do the action.

I've got work to do. (not I've got work to be done.)

They've sent Jane a form to fill in.

We use passive infinitives if we are thinking more about the action, or
the person/thing that the action is done to.

The carpets to be cleaned are in the garage. (not The-carpets to clean
-...) His desk is covered with forms to be filled in.

After be, we normally use passive infinitives in these cases.

These sheets are to be washed (not These-sheets are to wash.)

This form is to be filled in in ink. (not This-f&rm-istofill in -...)

The cleaning is to be finished by midday, (not .. .-is-to-finish -...)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark18>>2    to be seen/found/congratulated etc

Note the expressions anywhere!nowhere to be seen!found.

He wasn't anywhere to be seen. (not. .. anywhere to see.)

Susan was nowhere to be found (not ... nowhere-to-find:)

We also use passive infinitives to express value judgements with verbs
like congratulate, encourage, avoid.

You are to be congratulated (not .. .-to-congratulate.)

This behaviour is to be encouraged But note the common expression to
blame, meaning ‘responsible' (for some unfortunate event).

Nobody was to blame for the accident.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark19>>3    nothing to do and nothing to be done
etc

Note the difference between nothing to do and nothing to be done, fm
bored - there's nothing to do. (= There are no entertainments.)

There's nothing to be done - we'll have to buy a new one.

(= There's no way of putting it right.)

For structures like She's easy to amuse, see 284.4.

For structures with take (e.g. The ferry took ttvo hours to unload), see
576.

For more about be + Infinitive, see 91.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark20>>288    infinitives (10): I'm glad to have
left

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark21>>1    perfect or past meaning

Perfect infinitives (to have gone, to have left etc) can have the same
kind of meaning as perfect or past tenses.

Vm glad to have left school (= I'm glad that I have left ...)

She was sorry to have missed Bill {=... that she had missed Bill.)

We hope to have finished the job by next Saturday. (= ... that we will
have finished ...)

You seem to have annoyed Anne yesterday. (= It seems that you annoyed
Anne yesterday.)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark22>>2    perfect infinitive for 'unreal' past

After some verbs (e.g. mean, be, would like), perfect infinitives can
refer to ‘unreal' past situations that are the opposite of what really
happened.

I meant to have telephoned, but I forgot, (or I meant to telephone...)

He was to have been the new ambassador, but he fell ill I wish I'd been
there - I would like to have seen Harry^{f}s face when Nan walked in.

With would like, would prefer and one or two other verbs, a double
perfect infinitive is sometimes used in informal speech; the extra
perfect infinitive does not change the meaning.

I would have liked to have seen Harry's face.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark23>>3    modais: He could have killed himself

After the modal verbs could, might, ought, should, would and needn't, we
often use perfect infinitives to refer to unreal situations.

Did you see him fall? He could have killed himself (He did not kill
himself.)

You should have written -1 was getting worried (The person did not
write.)

I would have gone to university if my parents had had more money.

(The speaker did not go to university.)

She needn't have sent me flowers.

(She did send flowers.)

Modal verbs with perfect infinitives can also refer to situations that
are not unreal, but uncertain.

She could/should/ought tofmayfwiWmust have arrived by now.

For more details, see the entries for the different modal verbs.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark24>>289    infinitives (11): purpose

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark25>>1 I sat down to rest

We often use an infinitive to talk about a person's purpose - why he or
she does something.

I sat down to rest (not I-sat-down for resting / for to rest)

He went abroad to forget

Vm going to Austria to learn German.

To switch on, press red button.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark26>>2 in order to; so as to

We can also use in order to ... (more formal) or so as to\_\_\_\_

He got up early in order to have time to pack.

I watched him in order to know more about him.

/ moved to a new flat so as to be near my work.

In order to / so as to are normal before negative infinitives.

Vm going to leave now, so as not to be late, (not Vm going to leave now,
not to-be-kite.)

A for-structure (see 291) can be used to talk about a purpose that
involves action by somebody else.

I left the door unlocked for Harriet to get in.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark27>>290 infinitives (12): subject, complement or
object

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark28>>1    subject: To practise is important /
It's important to practise

In older English, an infinitive clause could easily be the subject of a
sentence. To practise regularly is important.

To wait for people who were late made him angry.

In modem English, this is unusual in an informal style. We more often
use it as a preparatory subject and put the infinitive clause later (see
446).

It's important to practise regularly.

It made him angry to wait far people who were late.

We can also use an -ing structure at the beginning of a sentence as the
subject, instead of an infinitive clause (see 295).

Selling insurance is a pretty boring job.

(More natural than To sell insurance...)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark29>>2    complement: Your task is to get across
the river

An infinitive clause can be used after be as a subject complement.

Your task is to get across the river without being seen.

My ambition was to retire at thirty.

Sentences like these can also be constructed with preparatory it (see
446).

It is your task to get across the river without being seen.

It was my ambition to retire at thirty.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark30>>3    object: I like to read the paper at
breakfast

Many verbs can have an infinitive clause as their object (see 283).
Compare:

-    I like cornflakes for breakfast (noun object)

I like to read the paper at breakfast (infinitive clause as object)

-    She wants some exercise.

She wants to dance.

For structures like He made it difficult to refuse, see 447.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark31>>291 infinitives (13): for ... to ...

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark32>>1    infinitive with its own subject

The structure for + noun/pronoun + infinitive is very common in English.

It is used when an infinitive needs its own subject. Compare:

-    Ann will be happy to help you. (Ann will help.)

Ann will be happy for the children to help you. (The children will
help.)

-    My idea was to learn Russian.

My idea was for her to learn Russian.

-    To ask Joe would be a big mistake.

For you to ask Joe would be a big mistake. (not You ta ask
Joe-would-be-...) Note that the subject of the infinitive is the object
of the preposition for. Object forms of pronouns are used.

Ann will be happy for them to help you. (not ...- for they-to help-youz)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark33>>2    use

The structure is often used when we are referring to possibility,
necessity or frequency, when we are expressing wishes, suggestions or
plans for the future, and when we are giving personal reactions to
situations. Like other infinitive structures, it is used especially
after adjectives, nouns and verbs; it can also act as the subject of a
clause. It often has the same meaning as a that-clause. Compare:

It's important for the meeting to start on time.

Ifs important that the meeting should start on time.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark34>>3    after adjectives: anxious for us to see
...

The structure Jbr + object + infinitive can be used after certain
adjectives which express wishes and other personal feelings about the
importance or value of future events (e.g. anxious, eager, delighted,
willing_{t} reluctant).

adjective + for + object + infinitive

She's anxious for us to see her work Tm eager for the party to be a
success.

Robert says hed be delighted for Mary to come and stay.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark35>>4    It's impossible for... to ...

For-structures with preparatory it (see 446) are common with many
adjectives expressing possibility, necessity, importance, urgency,
frequency and value judgements.

(...) it (...)+ adjective + for + object + infinitive

It's impossible Jbr the job to be finished in time.

Would it be easy for you to phone me tomorrow?

It's important for the meeting to start at eight.

It seems unnecessary Jbr him to start work this week.

I consider it essential Jbr the school to be properly heated.

Is it usual for foxes to come so close to the town?

I thought it strange Jbr her to be out so late.

Its not good for the oil tank to be so close to the house.

Other common adjectives that are used in this way include vital,
necessary, pointless, unimportant, common, normal unusual rare, right,
wrong. Note that likely and probable are not used like this.

She's likely to arrive this evening, (not ft's-Ulcely for her
to-arrive-this evening.)

It's probable that she'll be in a bad temper or She'll probably be...
(not probable-for-her-to-be-...)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark36>>5    after nouns: It's a good idea for us to
...

The structure can also be used after nouns in expressions with meanings
similar to the adjectives listed above. Examples are: time, a good!bad
idea, plan, aim, need, request, mistake, shame.

It's time for everybody to go to bed.

It's a good idea for us to travel in separate cars.

There's a plan for Jack to spend a year in Japan.

Our aim is for students to learn as quickly as possible.

It was a big mistake for them not to keep John as manager It was a real
shame for them not to win after all their work

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark37>>6    something for me to do

Something, anything, nothing and similar words are often followed by for
+ object + infinitive.

Have you got something for me to do?

There's nothing for the cats to eat

Is there anybody for Louise to play with in the village?

I must find somewhere for him to practise the piano.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark38>>7    after verbs: ask for... to ...

For structures are not normally used as objects after verbs.

I need you to help me. (not Fneedfor you to help me.)

However, verbs which are normally followed by for (e.g. ask, hope, wait,
look, pay, arrange) can often be used with for + object + infinitive.

Anne asked for the designs to be ready by Friday.

I can't wait for them to finish talking.

Can you arrange for the gold to be delivered on Monday? (not ... for the
gold being-delivered:)

A few other verbs can be used like this, e.g. suit and take (time).

When will it suit you for us to call?

It took twenty minutes for the smoke to clear In informal American
English, like, hate, mean, intend and some other verbs with similar
meanings can be used with a /or-structure. This is not usually possible
in British English.

I would like for you to stay as long as you want.

She hates for people to feel sad

Did you mean for John to mail those letters?    ►

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark39>>8    after too and enough

A /or-structure is often used after too and enough.

This is much too heavy for you to lift.

There are too many people here for me to talk to all of them.

Do you think it's warm enough for the snow to melt?

I explained enough for her to understand what was happening.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark40>>9    as subject

The ybr-structure can be the subject of a clause.

For us to fail now would be a disaster.

For her to lose the election would make me very happy.

However, it is more common for a structure with preparatory it to be
used (see paragraph 4 above).

It would make me very happy for her to lose the election.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark41>>10    for there to be

The infinitive of there is (there to be) can be used after for.

I'm anxious for there to be plenty of time Jbr discussion.

Its important for there to be a fire escape at the back of the building.

11    t/iat-dauses

Instead of for + object + infinitive, a that-clause with should or a
subjunctive (see 567) is often possible, especially when we want to
express wishes, recommendations, suggestions and plans for the future. A
that-clause is usually more formal than a /or-structure.

It is important that there should be a fire escape.

Vm anxious that the party should be a success.

His idea is that we should travel in separate cars.

It is essential that the meeting start at eight.

For sentences like He made it difficult Jbr us to refuse, see 447,

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark42>>292 infinitives (14): other uses

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark43>>1 I came home to find...

Infinitive clauses can be used to say what somebody found out or learnt
at the end of a journey or task.

I arrived home to find that the house had been burgled.

The idea of surprise or disappointment can be emphasised by using only.

At last we got to Amy's place, only to discover that she was away.

He spent four years studying only to learn that there were no jobs.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark44>>2 To hear her talk, you'd think...

The infinitives of see and hear can be used to explain the reason for a
false impression. The infinitive structure is usually followed by you'd
think or a similar expression.

To see them, you'd think they were married. But they only met yesterday.
To see him walk down the street, you'd never know he was blind.

To hear her talk, you'd think she was made of money.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark45>>293 -ing forms (1): introduction

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark46>>1 'participles and 'gerunds'

We can use -ing forms (e.g. smoking, walking,) not only as verbs, but
also like adjectives or nouns. Compare:

You're smoking too much these days. (verb: part of present progressive)
There was a smoking cigarette end in the ashtray. (adjective describing
cigarette end}

Smoking is bad for you. (noun: subject of sentence)

When -ing forms are used as verbs or adjectives, they are often called
'present participles'. (This is not a very suitable name, because these
forms can refer to the past, present or future.) When they are used more
like nouns, they are often called 'gerunds'.

In Practical English Usage the expression ‘-ing form' is used except
when there is a good reason to use one of the other terms. Noun-like
uses of -ing forms ('gerunds') are discussed in the following entries.
For their use to make progressive verb forms, see 470 and the entries on
the present progressive, past progressive etc. Other ways of using -ing
forms are discussed in 408-411 ('participles'), together with similar
uses of 'past participles' (e.g. invited, broken).

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark47>>2    perfect, passive and negative -ing
forms

Note the structure of perfect, passive and negative -ing forms.

Having slept for twelve hours, I felt marvellous, (perfect)

She loves being looked at (passive)

Not knowing what to do, I went home. (negative)

She's angry about not having been invited, (negative perfect passive)

For spelling rules, see 560-562.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark48>>3    -ing form or infinitive?

-ing forms are often used in similar ways to infinitives. For instance,
they can follow certain verbs, adjectives or nouns (see 296-297).
Compare:

-    He agreed to wait

He suggested waiting, (not He-suggested to wait)

-    She's ready to listen.

She's good at listening, (not She's good to listen.)

-    the need to talk

the idea of talking (not the-idea to talk)

Unfortunately there is no easy way to decide which verbs, adjectives and
nouns are followed by -ing forms, and which are followed by infinitives.
It is best to check in a good dictionary.

Expressions with -ing forms can also be used as subjects in sentences,
or as complements after be. Infinitives are also possible in these
cases, but they are much less common in informal English. Compare:

Smoking cigarettes can kill you. (More natural than To smoke cigarettes
can kill you.)

My favourite activity is reading thrillers. (More natural than My
favourite activity is to read thrillers.)    t

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark49>>4 'participles' and 'gerunds': an unclear
difference

The distinction between ‘participles' and ‘gerunds' is not always
clear-cut, and it can sometimes be difficult to decide which term to
use. For this reason, some grammarians prefer to avoid the terms
‘participle' and ‘gerund'. For a detailed discussion of this point, see
Section 17.54 of A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language, by
Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech and Svartvik (Longman 1985).

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark50>>294    -ing forms (2): a waiting room; a
waiting train

-mg forms can be used before nouns. This can happen both with noun-like

*ing forms (‘gerunds') and adjective-like -mg forms (‘participles'). The
two structures do not have quite the same kind of meaning. Compare:

-    a waiting room (= a room for waiting. Waiting is a gerund, used
rather like a noun. Compare a guest room.)

a waiting train (= a train that is waiting. Waiting is a participle,
used rather like an adjective. Compare an early train.)

-    a sleeping pill (sleeping is a gerund)

a sleeping child (sleeping is a participle)

-    working conditions (gerund) working men and women (participle)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark51>>295    -ing forms (3): subject, complement
or object

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark52>>1    Smoking is bad for you

An -mg form (‘gerund') can be used, just like a noun, as the subject or
complement of a verb.

Smoking is bad for you. (subject)

My favourite activity is reading,; (complement)

Infinitives (e.g. To smoke is bad for you) are possible in these cases,
but are formal and uncommon.

-ing forms can also be used as objects after certain verbs (see 296).

I hate packing. (object)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark53>>2    -ing form with its own object

The -ing form subject, complement or object is used like a noun, but it
is still a verb and can have its own object.

Smoking cigarettes is bad for you.

My favourite activity is reading thrillers.

I hate packing suitcases.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark54>>3    the opening of Parliament, my smoking

We can often use determiners (for example the, my, this) with -ing
forms. the opening of Parliament

Does my smoking annoy you? I hate all this useless arguing.

Possessive 's forms are also possible.

John's going to sleep during the wedding was rather embarrassing.

She was angry at Lina's trying to lie to her:

Subject pronouns are not possible.

His shouting gets on my nerves. (but not He shouting...)

Note that possessives and pronouns are not used before -ing forms if it
is already clear who is being talked about.

Thank you for waiting, (not Thank you for your-urattmg.)

When an -ing form is used with an article, it cannot usually have a
direct object. Instead, we can use an o/-structure.

the smoking of cigarettes (not the-smoking cigarettes)

No is often used with an -ing form to say that something is not allowed,
or is impossible. This often happens in notices and after there is.

NO SMOKING NO PARKING NO WAITING Sorry - there's no smoking in the
waiting room.

She's made up her mind; there's no arguing with her.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark55>>4    object forms: Do you mind me smoking?

In an informal style it is more common to use object forms (like me,
John) instead of possessives (my, John's) with -ing forms, especially
when these come after a verb or preposition.

Do you mind me smoking? She was angry at Lina trying to lie to her.
After some verbs (e.g. see, hear, watch, feel) possessives are not
normally used with -ing forms.

I saw him getting out of the car. (not I saw his-getting-...)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark56>>5    it's nice being with you

We can use it as a preparatory subject or object for an -ing form (see
446-447). It's nice being with you.

I thought it pointless starting before eight o'clock.

This is common with anylno good, anylno use and (not) worth (see 632).

It's no good talking to him - he never listens.

Is it any use expecting them to be on time?

It's no use his/him apologising -1 shall never forgive him.

I didn't think it worth complaining about the meal.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark57>>6    nouns and -ing forms

When there is a noun which has a similar meaning to an -mg form, the
noun is usually preferred.

We're all excited about his arrival (not ... -about his-arriving:)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark58>>296 -ing forms (4): after verbs

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark59>>1 verbs that can be followed by -ing forms

After some verbs we can use an -mg form (‘gerund'), but not normally an
infinitive.

I enjoy travelling, (not I-enjoy-to travel.)

He's finished mending the car. (not He's finished to mend...)

She's given up smoking, (not ... given up to smoke.)

The doctor suggested taking a long holiday, (not The doctor suggested
(me) to take...)    ►

Some common verbs that are normally followed by -mg forms:

| admit               | dislike     | give up        | practise        |
| appreciate          | endure      | (can't) help   | put off         |
| avoid               | enjoy       | imagine        | resent          |
| burst out           | escape      | involve        | resist          |
| (crying/laughing)   | excuse      | keep (on)      | risk            |
| consider            | face        | leave off      | (can't) stand   |
| contemplate         | fancy       | mention        | suggest         |
| delay               | feel like   | mind           | understand      |
| deny                | finish      | miss           |                 |
| detest              | forgive     | postpone       |                 |

Some verbs can be followed by both -mg forms and infinitives - see
paragraph 4 below.

Unfortunately there is no easy way to decide which structures are
possible after a particular verb. It is best to check in a good
dictionary.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark60>>2    verb + object + -ing form

Some of the verbs listed above, and some others, can be followed by
object + -ing form.

I dislike people telling me what to think.

I can't imagine him working in an office.

Nobody can stop him doing what he wants to He spends all his time
gardening.

Did you see her talking to the postman?

Stop (in an informal style) and prevent are often followed by object +
from + ing form.

Try to stop/prevent them (from) finding out.

Note that after many verbs we can use possessive + -ing form rather than
object + -mg form, especially in a formal style. (See 295.3 for
details.)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark61>>3    -ing form with passive meaning

After deserve, need and require, the -ing form has a passive sense. This
structure is more common in British than American English.

I don't think his article deserves reading. (= ... deserves to be read.)

Your hair needs cutting. (= ... needs to be cut.)

In informal British English, want can also be used like this.

The car wants servicing. (= ... needs to be serviced.)

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark62>>4    -ing form or infinitive

After some verbs, either an -ing form or an infinitive can be used.
These include:

| advise       | forbid   | hear     | prefer     | start   |
| allow        | forget   | intend   | propose    | stop    |
| can't bear   | go       | like     | regret     | try     |
| begin        | go on    | love     | remember   | watch   |
| continue     | hate     | permit   | see        |         |

In some cases there is a difference of meaning: see 299. For infinitives
after verbs, see 282.

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark63>>297    -ing forms (5): after nouns and
adjectives

<<main-18.xhtml#bookmark64>>1 the idea of getting old; tired of
listening

Some nouns and adjectives can be followed by -ing forms (‘gerunds'). A
preposition is normally used to connect the noun/adjective to the -ing
form. Nouns/adjectives that are followed by -ing forms cannot usually be
followed by infinitives (see paragraph 3 for some exceptions).

I hate the idea of getting old. (not ... the idea-to get old.)

The thought of failing never entered his head, (not The thought \^to
fatb...) Vm tired of listening to this, (not I'm tired to listen-...)

She's very good at solving problems, (not ... good to solve-...)
Unfortunately there is no easy way to decide which nouns and adjectives
can be followed by -ing forms. It is best to check in a good dictionary.

<<main-19.xhtml>>

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    purpose: a machine for cutting

For + -ing form can be used after a noun, or after an indefinite pronoun
such as something or anything, to explain the purpose of an object or
material -what it is for.

A strimmer is a machine for cutting grass and weeds Have you got any
stuff for cleaning silver?

I need something for killing flies This structure is mostly used to talk
in general about types of object and material. When we talk about
somebody's purpose in using a particular object, we are more likely to
use an infinitive (see 207.2).

I must find something to kill that fly.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    -ing form or infinitive

After a few nouns and adjectives, we can use either an -ing form or an
infinitive. Normally there is little or no difference of meaning (see
299.13-16 for some exceptions).

We have a good chance of making / to make a profit:

Tm proud of having won / to have won.

For be used to .. .ing, see 605.

For infinitives after nouns and adjectives, see 284-285.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark2>>298    -ing forms (6): without breaking;
before starting

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark3>>1 after all prepositions

When we put a verb after a preposition, we normally use an -ing form
('gerund*), not an infinitive.

You can't make an omelette without breaking eggs, (not ... without to
break eggs)

Always check the oil before starting the car. (not ... before to start
the car.) We got the job finished by working sixteen hours a day.

He's talking about moving to the country

They painted the house instead of going on holiday, (not .. .-instead
to-ge-...)    ►

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    to as a preposition: I look forward to
...ing

To is actually two different words. It can be an infinitive marker, used
to show that the next word is an infinitive (e.g. to swim, to laugh). It
can also be a preposition, followed for example by a noun (e.g. She's
gone to the park, 1 look forward to Christmas).

When to is a preposition, it can be followed by the -ing form of a verb,
but not normally by the infinitive. Common expressions in which this
happens are look forward to, object to, be used to, prefer (doing one
thing to doing another), get round to, in addition to.

In the following examples, note how the preposition to can be followed
by either a noun or an -ing form.

-    1 look forward to your next letter.

I look forward to hearing from you. (not .. -tv-kear-from you.)

-    Do you object to Sunday work?

Do you object to working on Sundays?

-    I'm not used to London traffic.

I'm not used to driving in London.

-    I prefer the seaside to the mountains.

I prefer swimming to walking.

-    I ll get round to the washing up sooner or later.

I'll get round to doing the washing up sooner or later.

A few verbs and adjectives are used with to before nouns, but are
followed by the infinitives of verbs. Examples are agree, consent,
entitled, inclined, prone. She agreed to our plan. / She agreed to do
what we wanted.

He's inclined to anger. / He's inclined to lose his temper.

Accustomed can be followed by to + -ing form or an infinitive (see
299.11).

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    object + infinitive after for. for her
to arrive

Note that some verbs are followed by for + object + infinitive. An -ing
form is not usually possible in these cases.

We're still waiting for her to arrive, (not .. .- waiting for her
arriving.)

Can you arrange for us to get tickets? (not ... for our getting
tickets?)

For the difference between used to + infinitive and be used to + -ing
form, see 604-5.

For -ing forms after conjunctions (e.g. When planning a holiday...), see
411.6.

For time clauses with on + -ing form, see 411.6.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark6>>299 -ing forms (7): remember, go on etc +
-ing or infinitive

Some verbs and adjectives can be followed by either -ing forms
(‘gerunds*) or infinitives.

I started playing / to play the violin when I was 70.

She was proud of having won / to have won.

With some of these verbs and adjectives, there is a difference of
meaning.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark7>>1    remember and forget

Remember/forget + -ing form looks back at the past - at things that one
did. Forget...ing is used mostly in the phrase I'll never forget.. .ing,
and expressions with similar meanings.

I still remember buying my first bicycle.

I'll never forget meeting the Queen.

Remember!forget + infinitive looks forward in time - at things that one
still has or still had to do at the moment of remembering or forgetting.

You must remember to fetch Mr Lewis from the station tomorrow.

I forgot to buy the soap.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark8>>2    go on

Go on + -ing form means 'continue*.

She went on talking about her illness until we all went to sleep.

Go on + infinitive refers to a change of activity.

She stopped talking about that and went on to describe her other
problems.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark9>>3    regret

Regret + -ing form looks back at the past - at something that one is
sorry that one did.

I regret leaving school at 14 - it was a big mistake.

Regret + infinitive is used mostly in announcements of bad news.

We regret to inform passengers that the 14.50 train is one hour late.

We regret to say that we are unable to help you.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark10>>4    advise, allow, permit and forbid

In active clauses after these verbs, we use an -ing form if there is no
object. If there is an object we use an infinitive. Compare:

-    I wouldn't advise taking the car - there's nowhere to park I
wouldn't advise you to take the car...

-    We don't allow/permit smoking in the lecture room.

We don't allow/permit people to smoke in the lecture room.

-    The headmistress has forbidden singing in the corridors.

The headmistress has forbidden children to sing...

Note the corresponding passive structures.

-    Smoking is not allowed/permitted in the lecture room.

People are not allowed/permitted to smoke in the lecture room.

-    Singing is forbidden.    - Early booking is advised.

Children are forbidden to sing. Passengers are advised to book early.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark11>>5    see, watch and hear

After these verbs, the difference between object + -ing form and object
+ infinitive is like the difference between progressive and simple
tenses. With -ing forms the verbs suggest that one pays attention to
events or actions that are already going on; infinitives usually refer
to complete events/actions which are seen/heard from beginning to end.
(Note that these verbs are followed by the infinitive without to.)
Compare:    ►

-    I looked out of the window and saw Mary crossing the road I saw
Mary cross the road and disappear into the post office.

-    As I passed his house I heard him practising the piano.

I once heard Brendel play all the Beethoven concertos.

For more details, see 242.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark12>>6    try

To talk about making an experiment - doing something to see what will
happen - we use try + -ing.

I tried sending her flowers, writing her letters, giving her presents,
but she still wouldn't speak to me.

To talk about making an effort to do something difficult, we can use
either try + infinitive or try + -ing

I tried to change the wheel, but my hands were too cold.

(or I tried changing the wheel...)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark13>>7    mean

Mean in the sense of 'involve', ‘have as a result' (see 348) can be
followed by an -ing form.

If you want to pass the exam it will mean studying hard.

In the sense of 'intend', mean is followed by an infinitive.

I don't think she means to get married for the moment.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark14>>8    learn and teach

These verbs (and others with similar meanings) are followed by -ing
forms mostly when we are referring to lessons or subjects of study.

She goes to college twice a week to learn typing.

Mr Garland teaches skiing in the winter.

Infinitives are preferred when we talk about the result of the study -
about successfully learning a skill.

She learnt to read German at school, but she learnt to speak it in
Germany. I taught myself to type.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark15>>9    like, love, hate and prefer

After these four verbs, both infinitives and -ing forms can often be
used without a great difference of meaning.

I hate working f to work at weekends.

I don't get up on Sundays. I prefer staying / to stay in bed.

Like + infinitive is used to talk about choices and habits. Compare:

I like climbing / to climb mountains (= I enjoy climbing.)

When I pour tea I like to put the milk in first. (= I choose to; it's my
habit.) After would like, would prefer, would hate and would love,
infinitives are most often used.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark16>>Yd like to tell you something; (not Vd like
telling you something.)

Can I give you a lift? ~No thanks, I'd prefer to walk, (not ... I'd
prefer walking:)

Compare:

Do you like dancing? (= Do you enjoy dancing?)

Would you like to dance? (= Do you want to dance now?)

For more about like, see 325.

For details of structures with prefer, see 444.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark17>>10    begin and start

Begin and start can be followed by infinitives or -ing forms. Usually
there is no important difference.

She began playing / to play the guitar when she was six.

He started talking / to talk about golf, but everybody went out of the
room. After progressive forms of begin and start, infinitives are
preferred.

I'm beginning to learn karate, (not fm beginmng learning karate.)
Infinitives are also preferred with understand, realise and know.

I slowly began to understand how she felt, (not ... began■
understanding..) He started to realise that if you wanted to eat you had
to work (not ...started-realmng-...)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark18>>11    attempt, intend, continue, can't bear,
be accustomed to, be committed to

After these words and expressions we can generally use either an -ing
form or an infinitive without much difference of meaning.

I intend telling / to tell her what I think

Vm not accustomed to giving/give personal information about myself to
strangers.

For details of structures with to + 'ing, see 298.2.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark19>>12    -ing form or infinitive of purpose:
stop

Some verbs that are followed by -ing forms can also be followed by an
infinitive of purpose (see 289). A common example is stop.

I stopped running, (not ... / stopped to run.)

I stopped to rest. (= ... in order to rest.)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark20>>13    afraid

To talk about fear of things that happen accidentally, we prefer afraid
of+ -ing,

I don't like to drive fast because Vm afraid of crashing.

Why are you so quiet? ~I'm afraid of waking the children.

In other cases we can use afraid of+ -ing or afraid + infinitive with no
difference of meaning.

Vm not afraid of telling I to tell her the truth.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark21>>14    sorry

Sorry fort about + -ing is used to refer to past things that one
regrets. (77iaf-clauses are also very common in an informal style.)

Vm sorry far/about losing my temper this morning.

(or Vm sorry that I lost my temper.)

Sorry + perfect infinitive (more formal) can be used with the same
meaning. Vm sorry to have woken you up. (or Vm sorry that I woke you
up.) ►

Sorry + infinitive is used to apologise for current situations - things
that one is doing or going to do, or that one has just done.

Sorry to disturb you - could I speak to you for a moment?

Vm sorry to tell you that you failed the exam.

Sorry to keep you waiting - we can start now.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark22>>15    certain and sure

Certain!sure of + -ing are used to refer to the feelings of the person
one is talking about.

Before the game she felt certain of winning, but after a few minutes she
realised it wasn't going to be so easy.

You seem very sure of passing the exam. I hope you're right.

Certain!sure + infinitive refer to the speaker's or writer's own
feelings.

The repairs are certain to cost more than you think. (not
The-repatrs-are certain of costing'...)

Kroftova's sure to win - the other girl hasn't got a chance.

Note that He is sure to succeed means ‘I am sure that he will succeed'.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark23>>16    interested

To talk about reactions to things one learns, interested + infinitive is
commonly used.

I was interested to read in the paper that scientists have found out how
to talk to whales.

Vm interested to see that Alice and Jake are going out together.

I shall be interested to see how long it lasts.

To talk about a wish to find out something, both interested + -ing and
interested + infinitive are common.

Vm interested in finding out / to find out what she did with all that
money. Aren't you interested in knowing / to know whether I'm pregnant?

To talk about a wish to do something, we use interested with an -mg
form. Vm interested in working in Switzerland Do you know anybody who
could help me? (not Vm interested to work-in-Switzerland...)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark24>>300 -ing forms (8): participles; progressive
verbs

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark25>>1    a crying baby

We can use -mg forms as adjectives before nouns.

I was woken by a crying baby.

There is growing anger at the government's policies.

When -mg forms are used like this, they are called 'present
participles'. Their use is explained in 408-410.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark26>>2    not knowing what to do ...

Participles can be used in another way. They can combine with other
words into ‘participle clauses'.

Not knowing what to do, I telephoned the police.

Who's the girl dancing with your brother?

For details of participle clauses, see 411.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark27>>3 progressive verbs

Present participles are also used to make progressive verb forms.

It's raining. (present progressive)

She arrived just when I was leaving; (past progressive)

For details of progressive forms, see 470 and the separate entries on
the present progressive, past progressive etc.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark28>>301    instead of

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark29>>1    preposition: instead of

Instead is not used alone as a preposition; we use the two words instead
of. I'll have tea instead of coffee, please. (not ... instead coffee...)

Can you work with Sally instead of me today_{t} please?

Instead of is not usually followed by an infinitive.

I stayed in bed all day instead of going to work (not ... instead of
(to) go to work.)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark30>>2    instead of and without

Instead suggests that one person, thing or action replaces another.
Without suggests that one person, thing etc is not together with
another. Compare:

-    Ruth was invited to the reception, but she was ilU so Lou went
instead of her.

(Lou replaced Ruth.) (not ... Lou went without her.)

Max and Jake were invited, but Max was ill, so Jake went without him.
(Normally they would have gone together.)

-    She often goes swimming instead of going to school. (Swimming
replaces

school.) (not She often goes swimming without going to school.)

She often goes swimming without telling her mother. (Swimming and
telling her mother should go together.) (not She often goes swimming
instead of telling her mother.)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark31>>3    adverb: instead

Instead (without of) is an adverb. It usually begins or ends a clause.

She didn't go to Greece after all Instead, she went to America.

Don't marry Phil. Marry me instead.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark32>>302    inversion (1): auxiliary verb before
subject

We put an auxiliary verb (and non-auxiliary have and be) directly before
the subject of a clause in several different structures.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark33>>1 questions

Have your father and mother arrived? (not Have arrived-your father and
mother7)

Where is the concert taking place? (not Where is taking place the
concert?) (not Where the concert is taking place?)

Spoken questions do not always have this word order (see 481).

You're coming tomorrow?

Indirect questions do not usually have this order (see 276).

I wondered what time the film was starting. (not ... what time was the
film starting.)

However, in formal writing inversion is sometimes used with be in
indirect questions after how, especially when the subject is long.

I wondered how reliable was the information I had been given

For more Information about questions, see 480-486.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark34>>2    exclamations

Exclamations (see 195) often have the form of negative questions (see
368).

Isn't it cold?    Hasn't she got lovely eyes?

In spoken American English, exclamations often have the same form as
ordinary (non-negative) questions.

Have you got a surprise coming! Was I mad!

In a rather old-fashioned literary style, inversion is sometimes found
in exclamations after how and what.

How beautiful are the flowers! What a peaceful place is Skegness!

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark35>>3    with may

May can come before the subject in wishes.

May all your wishes come true!    May he rot in hell!

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark36>>4    after so, neither, nor

In 'short answers' and similar structures, these words are followed by
auxiliary verb + subject.

I'm hungry. ~So am I.

I don't like opera, ~ Neither/Nor do L

For more details of these structures, see 541 and 374.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark37>>5    after as, than and so

Inversion sometimes happens after as, than and so in a literary style.

She was very religious, as were most of her friends.

City dwellers have a higher death rate than do country people.

So ridiculous did she look that everybody burst out laughing.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark38>>6    conditional clauses

In formal and literary conditional clauses, an auxiliary verb can be put
before the subject instead of using if (see 261.5).

Were she my daughter... (= If she were my daughter ...)

Had I realised what you intended ... (= If I had realised ...)

Negatives are not contracted in this case.

Had we not spent all our money already, ... (not Hadn't we spent...)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark39>>7    after negative and restrictive
expressions

If a negative adverb or adverbial expression is put at the beginning of
a clause for emphasis, it is usually followed by auxiliary verb +
subject. These structures are mostly rather formal.

Under no circumstances can we cash cheques.

At no time was the President aware of what was happening.

Not until much later did she learn who her real father was.

The same structure is possible after a complete clause beginning not
until...

Not until he received her letter did he fully understand her feelings.
Inversion is also used after restrictive words like hardly (in BrE),
seldom, rarely, little and never, and after only + time expression. This
is formal or literary. Hardly had I arrived when trouble started. (BrE)

Seldom have I seen such a remarkable creature.

Little did he realise the danger he faced.

Never... was so much owed by so many to so few. (Churchill)

Only then did I understand what she meant Only after her death was I
able to appreciate her.

Not only did we lose our money, but we were nearly killed.

Not a single word did he say.

Inversion is not used after not far... and not long...

Not far from here you can see foxes, (not Not far from here can you ...)
Not long after that she got married.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark40>>303 inversion (2): whole verb before subject

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark41>>1    after adverbial expressions of place

When an adverbial expression of place or direction comes at the
beginning of a clause, intransitive verbs are often put before their
subjects. This happens especially when a new indefinite subject is being
introduced. The structure is most common in literary and descriptive
writing.

Under a tree was lying one of the biggest men I had ever seen.

On the grass sat an enormous frog.

Directly in front of them stood a great castle.

Along the road came a strange procession.

This structure is often used in speech with here, there and other short
adverbs and adverb particles.

Here comes Freddy! (not Here Freddy comes.)

There goes your brother.

I stopped the car, and up walked a policeman.

The door opened and out came Angela's boyfriend.

If the subject is a pronoun, it goes before the verb.

Here she comes, (not Here comes she.) Off we go!

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark42>>2    reporting

In story-telling, the subject often comes after reporting verbs like
said, asked, suggested etc when these follow direct speech.

What do you mean?' asked Henry, (or ... Henry asked.)

7 love you,' whispered Jan.

If the subject is a pronoun, it usually comes before the verb.

What do you mean?' he asked.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark43>>304 irregular verbs

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark44>>1 common irregular verbs

This is a list of the more common irregular verbs. Students should check
that they know all of them. For a complete list, see a good dictionary.

| Infinitive   | Simple past        | Past participle    |
| arise        | arose              | arisen             |
| awake        | awoke              | awoken             |
| be           | was, were          | been               |
| bear         | bore               | bom(e)             |
| beat         | beat               | beaten             |
| become       | became             | become             |
| begin        | began              | begun              |
| bend         | bent               | bent               |
| bet          | bet, betted        | bet, betted        |
| bind         | bound              | bound              |
| bite         | bit                | bitten             |
| bleed        | bled               | bled               |
| blow         | blew               | blown              |
| break        | broke              | broken             |
| bring        | brought            | brought            |
| broadcast    | broadcast          | broadcast          |
| build        | built              | built              |
| burn         | burnt/burned       | burnt/burned       |
| burst        | burst              | burst              |
| buy          | bought             | bought             |
| catch        | caught             | caught             |
| choose       | chose              | chosen             |
| come         | came               | come               |
| cost         | cost               | cost               |
| cut          | cut                | cut                |
| deal         | dealt /delt/       | dealt /delt/       |
| dig          | dug                | dug                |
| do           | did                | done               |
| draw         | drew               | drawn              |
| dream        | dreamt /dremt/     | dreamt /dremt/     |
|              | dreamed /dri:md/   | dreamed /driimd/   |
| drink        | drank              | drunk              |
| drive        | drove              | driven             |
| eat          | ate /et/           | eaten /'iitan/     |
| fall         | fell               | fallen             |
| feed         | fed                | fed                |
| feel         | felt               | felt               |
| fight        | fought             | fought             |
| find         | found              | found              |
| fly          | flew               | flown              |

forbid    forbade    forbidden

forget    forgot    forgotten

forgive    forgave    forgiven

freeze    froze    frozen

shake

shine

shoot

show

shrink

shut

sing

sink

sit

sleep

slide

smell

speak

speed

spell

spend

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark45>>spiU

spin

spit

split

spoil

spread

stand

steal

stick

sting

strike

swear

sweep

swing

swim

take

teach

tear

tell

think

throw

understand

wake

wear

win

wind /waind/ write

Simple past shook

shone /Jon/

shot

showed

shrank/shrunk

shut

sang

sank

sat

slept

slid

smelt/smelled

spoke

sped

spelt/spelled

spent

spilt/spilled

span/spun

spat

split

spoilt/spoiled

spread

stood

stole

stuck

stung

struck

swore

swept

swung

swam

took

taught

tore

told

thought

threw

understood

woke

wore

won

wound /waund/ wrote

Past participle

shaken

shone /Jon/

shot

shown

shrunk

shut

sung

sunk

sat

slept

slid

smelt/smelled

spoken

sped

spelt/spelled spent

spilt/spilled

spun

spat

split

spoilt/spoiled

spread

stood

stolen

stuck

stung

struck

sworn

swept

swung

swum

taken

taught

tom

told

thought

thrown

understood

woken

worn

won

wound /waund/ written

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark46>>verbs that are easily confused

Infinitive    Simple past

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Past participle

fallen

felt

filled

found

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

fell

felt

filled

found

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

fall

feel

fill

find

(= get back something lost) found

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

founded

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

founded

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

(= start up an organisation or institution)

flow

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

flowed

flew

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

flowed

flown

laid

lain

lied

left

lived

raised

risen

struck

stroked

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

(of a liquid = move)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark47>>fly

(= move in the air)

(= go/get up)

strike    struck

(= hit)

stroke    stroked

(= pass the hand gently over)

wind /waind/

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

wound /waund/ wound /waund/

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

(= turn, tighten a spring etc) wound /wumd/ wounded (= injure in a
battle)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

wounded

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark48>>3 notes

•    Says is pronounced /sez/.

•    The old past participle drunken is used as an adjective in some
expressions (e.g. a drunken argument, drunken driving), but these are
not very common.

•    Prove (regular) has an irregular past participle proven which is
sometimes used instead of proved, especially as an adjective (e.g. a
proven liar),

•    Speed can also have regular forms, especially in the expression
speeded up.

•    Sung and sunk are sometimes used instead of sang and sank.

•    Burn, dream, lean, learn, smell, spell, spill and spoil are all
regular in American English. In British English, irregular past tenses
and participles with -t are also common.

•    Dive is regular in British English, but can be irregular in
American: dive - dived/dove f/douv/) - dived

•    Fit and quit are usually irregular in American English.

•    The American past participle of get is either got or gotten (see
233.7).

•    Spit has both spit and spat as past tense and participle in
American English.

•    Note the standard AmE pronunciations of ate (/eit/) and shone
(/Joun/).

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark49>>305    its and it's

These two words are often confused by native speakers of English as well
as by foreign learners.

Its is a possessive word (like my, your).

Every country has its traditions. (not ... it's traditions.)

It's is the contracted form of it is or it has.

It*s raining again. (not Its mining again.)

Have you seen my camera? It's disappeared. (not ... Its disappeared;)

There is a similar difference between whose and who's - see 627.

For more about contractions, see 143.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark50>>306    it's time

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark51>>1    followed by infinitive

Its time (or it is time) can be followed by an infinitive.

It's time to buy a new car:

To say who should do something, we use for + object + infinitive (see
291). It's time for her to go to bed.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark52>>2    followed by past tense with present
meaning

It's time can also be followed by a subject with a past tense verb. The
meaning is present.

It's time she went to bed. It's time you washed those trousers.

I'm getting tired. lt*s time we went home.

The expression It's high time... is often used in this structure in
British English, to say that something is urgent.

It's high time you got a job.

For other structures in which a past tense has a present or future
meaning, see 426.

just 307

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark53>>307 just

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark54>>1    meanings

Just has several meanings, a time

Just often emphasises the idea of ‘at this moment' or ‘close to the
present'. I'll be down in a minute - Vm just changing my shirt. (= right
now)

Alice has just phoned. (= a short time ago)

Keith's still around. I saw him just last week. (= as recendy as)

In expressions like just after, just before and just when, just suggests
closeness to the time in question.

I saw him just after lunch (= ... very soon after lunch.)

b 'only', 'scarcely'

Just can mean ‘only', ‘nothing more than', ‘scarcely'.

Complete set of garden tools for just £15.99!

I just want somebody to love me - that's all We just caught the train.

This meaning can be emphasised by only.

There was only just enough light to read by.

CartJCould I just...? can make a request seem less demanding.

Could I just use your phone for a moment?

c 'exactly'

Just often means 'exactly'.

What's the time? ~It's just four o'clock.

Thanks. That's just what I wanted.

She's just as bad-tempered as her father.

d emphasiser

Just can emphasise other words and expressions, with the sense of
'simply', ‘there's no other word for it'.

You're just beautiful I just love your dress.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    tenses

When just means 'a moment ago', past and present perfect tenses are both
possible in British English. A present perfect is preferred when we are
giving news. Compare:

Where's Eric? ~ He's just gone out.

Vve just had a brilliant idea.

John just phoned. His wife's had a baby. (The news is the baby, not the
phone call.)

In American English a past tense is normal in all cases.

Where's Eric? ~ He just went out

I just had a brilliant idea.    ►

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark56>>3 just now

Just now can mean either ‘at this moment* or ‘a few moments ago*.
Compare: She's not in just now. Can I take a message?

I saw Phil just now. He wanted to talk to you.

When just now means ‘a few moments ago', two positions are possible:

a in end-position, usually with a past tense.

I telephoned Ann just now.

b in mid-position (see 24) with the verb, with a present perfect or past
tense. ICve) just now realised what I need to do.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark57>>308 kinds of English (1):

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark58>>standard English and dialects

‘A language is a dialect that has an army and a navy.* (Max Weinreich)

‘Dialect: A language variety that has everything going for it, except
the government, the schools, the middle class, the law and the armed
forces.'

(Tom McArthur)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark59>>1    What is 'standard English'?

After King Alfred's victory over the Vikings in 878, the government of
Southern England came to be established in London, which later became
the capital of the whole of Britain. Because of this, the English spoken
in London and the East Midlands was gradually adopted as the ‘official'
variety of English. And as time went by, this dialect (and its later
developments, profoundly influenced by Norman French), became the
‘standard* language - the form of English generally accepted for use in
government, the law, business, education and literature. Standard
English, like ail standard languages, is therefore largely the result of
historical accident. If the Vikings, who held the north of England, had
defeated Harold's army, the capital of modem Britain might well be York,
and this book would be written in (and about) a very different kind of
English.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark60>>2    What is a dialect?

Many people think that dialects are corrupted forms of a language,
spoken by ignorant people who make mistakes because they have not learnt
correct grammar. This is not at all true (for more about correctness,
see 309). A standard language is not linguistically ‘better' than other
dialects; it is simply the dialect that has been adopted for official
purposes such as government and education. All English dialects have a
long history, going back to the distinct forms of speech of the Germanic
and Scandinavian invaders who came from various parts of northern Europe
to occupy Britain during the Middle Ages. And each of these dialects has
a grammar that is as rich and systematic as standard English, even
though it may be very different. Some examples of English dialect forms:

I bain't ready. (= I*m not ready.)

He don't like it. I wants a rest.

Where's them papers what I give you?

Can ye no help me? (= Can't you help me?)

They're not believing it

She's after telling me. (= She's told me.)

Are youse coming or not? (= Are you - plural - coming or not?)

I ain't done nothing. (= I haven't done anything,)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark61>>3    pronunciation: dialect and accent;
'received pronunciation'

A dialect is not the same as a regional accent (though they often go
together). Many British people speak standard English, but with the
typical accent of their part of the country. Other British people,
however, combine standard English with a non-regional standard
pronunciation. This (the so-called 'received pronunciation' or *RP') is
the pronunciation that has traditionally been used by a majority of
British upper- and upper-middle-class people, though it has changed a
good deal over the years. For a long time RP was considered more
'correct' than other accents, and its social dominance was reinforced by
education and the media. This attitude is now changing, and there is
less social prejudice in Britain than before against regional accents.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark62>>4    showing accent in writing

Writers may spell words in special ways to show a non-standard or
conversational pronunciation - for example, apostrophes may be used in
place of letters that are not pronounced. These spellings are common in
cartoon strips. Some examples (mostly BrE):

'e's gone 'ome. (= He's gone home.)

'elp yerself (= Help yourself.)

Yer gettin* old. (= You're getting old.)

If I get me 'ands on yer... (= If I get my hands on you ...)

Where d'she put 'em? (= Where did she put them?)

C'mon, we're late. (= Come on ...)

Cn I *ave a glass o' water? (= Can I have a glass of water?) fish 'n'
chips. (= fish and chips)

Come wV me. (= Come with me.)

I dunno. (= I don't know.)

I gotta go. (= I've got to go.)

It's gonna rain. (= It's going to rain.)

I don't wanna play. (= I don't want to play.)

Gotta, gonna and wanna are most common in AmE.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark63>>5    other standard forms of English

Standard British English is not, of course, the only standard form of
English. American English also has a standard variety; this is different
from standard British English in a number of ways (see 51). Other
English-speaking countries, too, have their own standard versions of the
language. Some of these are very close to British or American English;
others (e.g. the developing Indian standard) are more clearly distinct.
   ►

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark64>>6    What kind of English should learners
study?

For most learners, the best model is one or other of the two main
standard varieties: British or American English. Neither of these is
'better' than the other, and they are both used and understood
worldwide. The differences are generally unimportant: for details, see
51.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark65>>7    international English

As English is used more and more as a language of international
communication, it seems possible that a new form of international
English may develop. This could be a ‘super-standard', with
characteristics of both British and American English. International
English could turn out to be simpler in some ways than the modem
standard varieties, without some of their less important grammatical
complications. It will be interesting to see what happens.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark66>>309 kinds of English (2): correctness

When people say that somebody's language is ‘not correct', they may mean
several different things.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark67>>1    slips and mistakes

People sometimes make slips of the tongue when they are talking.

He works in Wildlife Conversation - I mean Conservation.

Somebody can use a word wrongly because he or she is unsure of its
meaning, or confuses it with another word.

You're being very authoritative. (meaning ‘authoritarian')

And many people have trouble with spelling and punctuation.

The firm has doubled its profits this year. (should be its profits)

Foreign learners may also make mistakes with points of grammar that do
not cause problems for native speakers.

J could not understanding the lecture. (instead of I could not
understand...)

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark68>>2    dialect forms

Many people think that dialects are corrupt versions of the standard
language, and that dialect forms are mistakes, made by ignorant people
who have not learnt correct grammar. In fact, this is not at all true
(see 308.2): dialects have their own systematic - but different -
grammars. Teachers in British schools often tell children whose dialects
have multiple negation, for example, that they are making mistakes if
they say things like / ain't done nothing, because ‘two negatives make a
positive' (so I ain't done nothing is supposed to mean ‘I have done
something'). This is not, of course, the case: in the child's dialect,
the sentence means ‘I haven't done anything'. And if ‘two negatives make
a positive*, then the teacher ought to be quite happy if the child says
T ain't done nothing to nobody^{1}, since logically three negatives must
make a negative! Dialect forms are not, therefore, incorrect in
themselves. They are, however, out of place in styles where only the
standard language is normally used. It would be inappropriate - in fact,
incorrect - to use I wants, he don't or a double negative in a school
essay, a job application, a newspaper article or a speech at a business
conference.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark69>>3    divided usage

Speakers of a standard language often differ about small points of
usage. Where two different forms are common, people who use one form may
claim that theirs is the only 'correct' usage, and that people who use
the other form are making mistakes. Some examples from modem English:

so-called ‘only correct form'    so-called ‘mistake'

John and I went to the cinema.    John and me went to the cinema.

They're different from us.    They're different to us.

fewer people    less people

Somebody's dropped his or her    Somebody's dropped their keys, keys.

I'm unemployed at present.    I'm unemployed presently.

In fact, all of the so-called ‘mistakes' listed above have been normal
in standard English for centuries, and are not wrong at all (though some
of them are more informal than the so-called ‘only correct forms', and
would be out of place in a formal style). For details, see 429 (/ and
me)_{}} 155 (different), 320 [less), 528 [their) and 467 (presently).

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark70>>4    prescriptive and descriptive rules

If people say that less people or different to is wrong, they are
following a prescriptive rule. Prescriptive rules are made by people who
believe that they can improve a language, or protect it against change.
A lot of prescriptive rules were made by eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century British grammarians, often because they thought that
English grammar should imitate Latin, which was considered a superior
language. A typical example is the rule that ‘split infinitives' like to
boldly go, where an adverb is put between to and the verb, are wrong (a
Latin infinitive is a single word, so cannot be split). Many people
still believe this, and try to avoid split infinitives, although the
rule is unrealistic (see 280.7). A similar rule said that sentences
should not end in prepositions (as in What are you waiting for? or I
don't like being shouted at.). In fact, it is quite normal for English
sentences to end in prepositions (see 452). Most prescriptive rules give
misleading information, and have little effect on the development of a
language.

Descriptive rules simply say what happens in one form of a language (for
example standard written British English, standard spoken American
English, Yorkshire English, Dublin English or Singapore English), and
not what some people feel ought to happen. The rules in this book are
descriptive of standard British English.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark71>>5    When do mistakes become correct?

When somebody misuses a word or expression, this may influence other
people to make the same mistake. Sometimes a mistake becomes so
widespread that it becomes part of the language (this is one way in
which languages develop), and we can no longer realistically call it a
‘mistake'. The expression oblivious of for example, originally meant
‘forgetful of, but came to be used to mean 'unconscious of. A hundred
years ago this was still a mistake; now it is the normal use. The same
thing is happening today with the expression a concerted effort. This
means ‘an effort by people working together', but some people now use it
mistakenly to mean ‘a strong effort'. ►

If enough people follow the trend, this will sooner or later become the
normal meaning, and the usage will have become correct.

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark72>>310 kinds of English (3): spoken and written
English

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark73>>1    length and complexity; organisation of
sentences

In writing, sentences can be planned in advance and revised, so there is
time to build up complex structures. Spoken structures are usually
simpler. Subjects, in particular, tend to be very short in speech. A
typical written sentence:

The group of young people who were sitting at the next table were making
so much noise that my friends and I found it difficult to continue our
conversation.

In speech, we might say something more like:

There were a lot of young people at the next table. They were making so
much noise we couldn't talk.

Written language is mostly made up of complete sentences. In
conversation, complete sentences are often unnecessary.

When are you seeing her? Half past eight. At your place? ~~No, at
Andy's. Spoken sentences are often more loosely organised than written
sentences, and the information may be ‘spaced out* more by putting some
of it before or after the main sentence (see 514).

Last Wednesday it was, I was just going to work,...

This guy who rang up, he's an architect. Well, he said...

They work very hard, most of them.

‘Fronting* - putting something other than the subject at the beginning
(see 513) - is more common in speech than in writing.

People like that I just can't stand. Strange people they are!

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark74>>2    structures

Some structures - for example, relative clauses with whom - are most
common in a formal style. Since speech is more often informal, and
writing is more often formal, these structures are most common in
written English. Other structures - for example, contractions like he's,
can't- are typically informal, and are most common in speech. (For more
about formal and informal language, see 311.) Some structures are common
in speech, but hardly ever found in writing - for example, declarative
questions (see 481): You live with your parents? certain conditional
structures (see 262):

It would be good if we'd get some rain. certain relative structures (see
498.16):

It's ridiculous to sing songs that you don't know what they mean. and
some kinds of ellipsis (see 179):

<<main-19.xhtml#bookmark75>>Couldn't understand a word.

Progressive and past verb forms are often used in speech in order to
sound less definite or direct (see 436).

I was hoping you could lend me some money.

And structures whose purpose is to keep a conversation going (e.g. reply
questions - see 484) are naturally only used in speech.

We had a lovely holiday. Did you?

<<main-20.xhtml>>

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark0>>3 vocabulary

Written language often uses longer, less common words and expressions
that are typical of a formal style (see 311), with a greater variety of
synonyms. In speech, people usually prefer shorter, more common words,
and they are more likely to keep repeating the same words. Phrasal verbs
are common in speech, and are often replaced by more formal single words
in writing. Compare:

I told him to get on the plane.

She instructed the man to board the aircraft.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark1>>311 kinds of English (4): formality

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark2>>1    formal and informal language

Most people speak and write in different ways on different occasions. In
some languages, for example, there are very complicated rules about how
to speak to older or more important people. English does not have a
system of this kind. However, there are some words and structures which
are mostly used in formal situations, when people are careful about how
they express themselves: for example in official notices, business
letters or reports, meetings or conferences, or polite conversations
with strangers. And some words and structures are mostly used in
informal situations: for example in conversations with friends, or
letters to one's family. Writing is more often formal, and speech is
more often informal, but informal writing and formal speech are used
when the situation makes them preferable.

Customer toilets are at the rear of the building. (Printed notice in an
Oxfordshire petrol station)

The toilets are outside round the back. (Handwritten notice in the same
petrol station, put up perhaps because the manager felt this would be
easier for some of his customers to understand.)

Most words and expressions are neither formal nor informal, but neutral
-English speakers do not have to know two ways of saying everything.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark3>>2    grammar

Some grammatical structures have different formal and informal versions.
For example, contracted auxiliary verbs and negatives (see 143) are
common in informal speech and writing. Compare:

FORMAL: It has gone. It is not possible.

INFORMAL: It's gone. It isn't possible.

Prepositions come at the end of certain structures in informal language
(see 452). Compare:

FORMAL: In which century did he live? informal: Which century did he
live in?

Some relative structures are different (see 495). Compare:

FORMAL: The man whom she married... informal: The man she married...

Some determiners are followed more often by singular verb forms in
formal language, and by plural forms in informal language (see 532.5).
Compare: FORMAL: Neither of us likes him.

informal: Neither of us like him.    ►

Subject and object forms of pronouns (e.g. I and me) are used
differently in formal and informal language (see 429). Compare:

-    FORMAL: It was she who first saw what to do.

INFORMAL: It was her that first saw what to do.

-    FORMAL: Whom did they elect?

INFORMAL: Who did they elect?

Ellipsis (leaving out words - see 177-182) is more common in informal
language. Compare:

-    formal: Have you seen Mr Andrews?

INFORMAL: Seen John?

-    FORMAL: We think that it is possible.

INFORMAL: We think it's possible.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark4>>vocabulary

Some words and expressions are used mainly in formal situations; in
neutral or informal situations other words or expressions are used. And
some words and expressions are only used in informal situations. Some
examples:

-    formal:    commence NEUTRAL/INFORMAL: begin, start

-    FORMAL:    alight (from a bus or train) NEUTRAL/INFORMAL: get ojf

-    formal:    I beg your pardon? neutral/informal: Pardon? Sorry? (AmE
Excuse me? Pardon me?) INFORMAL: What?

-    formal:    repair NEUTRAL /informal: mend (BrE)

INFORMAL:    fix

-    formal:    acceptable, satisfactory NEUTRAL / INFORMAL: all right
INFORMAL: OK

-FORMAL:    I am (very) grateful to you,

NEUTRAL/INFORMAL: Thank you.

INFORMAL:    Thanks.

For structures used in polite requests and questions, see 435-7.

For formal and informal ways of using people's names and titles, see
363.

For the language used in particular social situations, see 545.

For taboo language, see 575. For slang, see 533.

For the use of out-of-date grammar and vocabulary in ceremonies and
other situations, see 392.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark5>>312 kinds of English (5): variation and
change

Languages change over time. Younger people adopt newer forms of
expression, while older people often resist change; so even people who
speak the same standard language do not speak it in exacdy the same way.
There are several reasons for change.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark6>>1 communicative need

Several centuries ago, standard English had two second-person pronouns:
thou (singular) and ye (plural). Modem English uses you for both. But
people still feel the need to distinguish singular and plural, and so
expressions like you guys (used for both men and women) are beginning to
function as second person plural pronouns.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark7>>2    influence from other dialects

British English is heavily influenced by American English. Some
structures which were not used by British speakers half a century ago
are now as common as their older British equivalents.

I feel like Vm getting a cold, (Older British form: I feel as if Vm
getting a cold.)

Do you have today's newspaper? (Older British form: Have you (got)
today's newspaper?)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark8>>3    Languages simplify themselves

As languages develop, complicated structures often become simpler and
more regular. This may be happening with English conditional sentences
-structures with would or would have in both clauses are quite common in
speech.

If you'd have asked Vd have told you.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark9>>4    Small, less important distinctions are
confused or disappear

Some irregular verb forms like sank/sunk, sang/sung or lay/laid are
quite often confused in speech. Examples from the British radio:

He wrote eight operas, all of which sunk without trace.

... a song she sung in yesterday's concert.

Infinitives and -ing forms after verbs also sometimes get mixed up. An
example from a letter:

I now have pleasure to enclose the correct proposal form. (instead of...
pleasure in enclosing...)

When confusions like these become widespread, they can lead to language
change. This may well happen with the possessive's form: more and more
people are leaving out the apostrophe or putting it in the ‘wrong^{1}
place, so that this spelling convention might one day lose its
importance and even disappear.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark10>>5    New forms and uses spread through the
language

Progressive verb forms came into English a few hundred years ago, and
gradually became used more and more widely. There are still a few verbs
that are not generally used in progressive forms (see 471), but even
these are losing their resistance. Some typical modem examples:

Vm understanding French a lot better now.

How many eggs were you wanting?

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark11>>6    'Underground' forms become respectable

Some forms have always existed in the language, but have been 'driven
underground' by prescriptive rules (see 309.4), so that they have been
avoided by careful speakers. People are now more tolerant of such forms,
so they are becoming more common. Some examples:

Here's your papers, (instead of Here are... - see 532.4)

Somebody's left their umbrella behind (instead of... his or her umbrella
-see 528)

John and me went to the cinema. between you and I    ►

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark12>>7    Mistakes become part of the language

Sometimes a mistake is made by so many people that it becomes the normal
form, and can no longer be called incorrect (see 309.5). This has
happened with the word data. It was originally a plural, from a Latin
word meaning ‘given things', but it is now widely used as a singular
uncountable noun. And recendy people have started using between ... to
instead of between ... and (e.g. There were between 50 to 60 people on
the bus). This, too, could end up as a normal and correct expression.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark13>>8    Phonetically weak forms disappear

The weak form of have in I've got is so quiet that it is often not heard
at all; and people are beginning to say I got instead of I've got. In
time, this could become a new regular form.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark14>>9    some more examples of changes in modern
English

•    Who is replacing whom.

Who do you trust? (George Bush's 1992 election slogan)

•    Will and would have now practically replaced first-person shall and
should.

We wiU be in touch soon. I would be gratefiil for some help.

•    Subjunctive were is becoming less common.

If I was ten years younger fd do the job myself I wish it was Friday.

•    Some adverbs without -ly are becoming more common.

You pronounced it wrong,

•    Comparatives and superlatives with more and most are gaining ground
in two-syllable adjectives.

'Commoner' used to be commoner, but ^{4}more common' is now more common.

•    Plural noun modifiers are becoming more common. For example,
antiques shop is now as common as antique shop, and drugs problem is
replacing drug problem.

•    The (very old) use of less with plurals is becoming more
respectable.

There were less people than I expected.

•    Some AmE prepositional uses and phrasal verb forms are moving into
BrE.

The following trains will not run due to engineering work on weekends.

(instead of... at weekends.)

We met with the unions yesterday, (instead of We met the unions ...) Can
I speak with Cathy? (instead of... speak to ...)

We haven't seen Granny in ages. (instead of... for ages.)

You have to fill out this form, (instead of... fill in ...)

•    The AmE use of a past tense with just and already is becoming
common in BrE.

Peter just went out. (instead of Peter has just gone out.)

I already told Jane about the party.

know 313

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark15>>313 know

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark16>>1    know how + infinitive

Know is not followed directly by infinitives. We use know how to (see
286).

I know how to make Spanish omelettes, (not I know to■ make...)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark17>>2    object + infinitive

In a formal style, know is sometimes followed by object + infinitive.

They knew him to be a dangerous criminal The passive equivalent is quite
common in a formal style.

He was known to be a dangerous criminal In a less formal style,
rhar-clauses are more usual.

They knew that he was a dangerous criminal Know means 'experience' in
the common structure I've never known + object + infinitive; an
infinitive without to is possible in British English.

Vve never known it (to) rain like this.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark18>>3    tenses

Know cannot usually be used in progressive forms (see 471).

I know exactly what you mean. (not / am knowing...)

A present perfect tense is used to say how long one has known somebody
or something. (See 460 for more details.)

We've known each other since 1994. (not We know each other since-i-994.)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark19>>4    know and know about/of

Know + object is used mainly to talk about knowledge that comes from
direct personal experience. In other cases, we normally use know
aboutlofi have heard of or another structure. Compare:

You don't know my mother> do you? No, I've never met her.

We all know about Abraham Lincoln, (not We all know Abraham Lincoln.)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark20>>5    know and find out etc

Know is not normally used to talk about finding something out: to know
something is to have learnt it, not to leam it. To talk about getting
knowledge we can use for example find out, get to know, leam, hear, can
tell She's married. Where did you find that out?

(not ... Where-did you know that?)

I want to travel round the world and get to know people from different
countries, (not ... and know people...)

He's from Liverpool as you can tell from his accent (not ... as you can
know from his accent)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark21>>6    I know and I know it

Note the difference between these two short answers.

I know refers to facts - it could be completed by a that-clause.

You're late. know. (= I know that I'm late.)

I know it generally refers to things - it replaces a noun.

I went to a nice restaurant called The Elizabeth last night ~ J know it.

(= I know the restaurant.)

For ways of using you know, see 157.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark22>>314 last, the last, the latest

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark23>>1 last week, month etc; the last week, month
etc

Last week, month etc (without the) is the week, month etc just before
this one. If I am speaking in July, last month was June; in 2006, last
year was 2005.

The last week, month etc is the period of seven/thirty/etc days up to
the moment of speaking. On July 15th 2006, the last month is the period
from June 16th to July 15th; the last year is the 12 months starting in
July 2005. Compare:

-    I was ill last week, but Ym OK this week (not t was ill
the-last-week-...) Vve had a cold for the last week I feel terrible.

-    We bought this house last year.

We've lived here for the last year, and we're very happy with the place.

The difference between next and the next is similar. See 375.

last week

r

PAST Mon Tu Weds Thurs \^ri Sat Sun Mon Tu Wed Thurs NOW

the last week

\_A\_

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

a

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

PAST Mon Tu Weds Thurs Fn Sat Sun Mori Tu Wed ihurs NOW

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark24>>2    the last three ... etc

Note the word order in expressions with numbers.

Vve been busy for the last three months, (not .. . for the three last
months.) We generally say the last few days! weeks etc, not the last
days! weeks etc.

The last few days have been busy. (not The last days...)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark25>>3    the last in a series

77?e last can also mean 'the last in a series'.

In the last week of the holiday something funny happened.

This is going to be the last Christmas YU spend at home.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark26>>4    latest and last

We can use latest to talk about something new, and last to mean ‘the one
before*. Compare:

-    Her latest book's being published next week (not Her last book ...)

She thinks it's much better than her last one.

-    He's enjoying his latest job. (not He's enjoying-his last job.)

But it doesn't pay as much as his last one.

For tenses with This is the last time ... etc, see 591.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark27>>315    later and in

With a time expression, we generally use later to mean ‘after that
time', and in to mean ‘after now'. Compare:

She got married on her 18th birthday; six months later she was divorced.
Pennys coming on July 1st, and Colin will arrive about a week later. fll
see you in a few days. (not I'll see your-a-few-days-later.)

But without a time expression, later can be used to mean ‘after now'.

Bye! See you later!

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark28>>316    lay and lie

There are three similar verbs that can be confused: lay (regular except
for spelling), lie (irregular) and lie (regular).

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark29>>1    lay

Lay is a regular verb except for its spelling. Its forms are:
infinitive: (to) lay past: laid -ing form: laying past participle: laid
Lay means ‘put down carefully* or ‘put down flat'. It has an object.

Lay the tent down on the grass and fll see how to put it up.

I laid the papers on the table, (not I lay -...)

Note the expressions lay a table (= put plates, knives etc on a table)
and lay an egg (a bird's way of having a baby).

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark30>>2    lie (irregular)

The forms of the irregular verb lie are: infinitive: (to) lie past: lay

-ing form: lying past participle: lain (used mostly in a formal/literary

style)

Lie (irregular) means ‘be down', ‘be/become horizontal'. It has no
object. Don't lie in bed all day. Get up and do some work (not Doft't
-kty-...)

I lay down and closed my eyes, (not / laid down ...)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark31>>3    lie (regular)

The regular verb lie (lied) means ‘say things that are not true'.

You lied to me when you said you loved me.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark32>>4    dialect forms

In many British and American dialects, different forms of lay and
irregular lie are used. Lay is often used in cases where standard
English has lie.

fm going to lay down for a few minutes. (Standard English ... lie down
...)

leam 317

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark33>>317    learn

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark34>>1    forms

Learn is often irregular in British English [learn!learnt) and normally
regular in American English {learn!learned). For other verbs like this,
see 304.3.

For the adjective learned (/'bznid/), see 18.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark35>>2    learn (how) to ...

To talk about consciously learning a method or technique for doing
something, we can use learn to ... or learn how to ...

She enjoyed learning (how) to look after young animals.

It's time you learnt (how) to change the oil in the car.

When we talk about less conscious skills and other kinds of knowledge,
we generally use learn to ....

Children usually leam to walk at around one year old.

In the new job, I soon learnt to keep my mouth shut

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark36>>318    least and fewest

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark37>>1    the least as determiner: superlative of
little

The least is used as a determiner before uncountable nouns; it is the
superlative of little (= not much - see 329), and the opposite of the
most I think I probably do the least work in this office.

The least can be used without a noun if the meaning is clear.

Jan earns the most money in our family; Pete earns the least We use the
least of before plural abstract nouns to mean ‘the smallest of. What
will your mother think? That's the least of my worries.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    'any ... at air

With singular abstract nouns, the least can mean ‘any ... at all*.

Do you think there's the least chance of Smith winning the election?
What's the time? ~/ haven't got the least idea.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    the fewest as determiner: superlative
of few

The fewest is used before plural nouns as the superlative of few (see
329).

The translation with the fewest mistakes isn't always the best.

Least is often used instead offewest before plural nouns (... the least
mistakes), especially in an informal style. Some people feel this is
incorrect.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark40>>4    (the) least with adjectives: the
opposite of (the) most or (the) ...est

(The) least is used before adjectives in the same way as (the) most or
(the).. .est (see 137), but with the opposite meaning.

The least expensive holidays are often the most interesting.

Vm least happy when I have to work at weekends.

For the use of die with superlatives, see 141.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark41>>5    least as adverb

Least can be used as an adverb (the opposite of most).

She always arrives when you least expect it.

I don't much like housework, and 1 like cooking least of all.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark42>>6    at least

At least means ‘not less than (but perhaps more than)'.

How old do you think he is? ~At least thirty.

He's been in love at least eight times this year.

We can also use at least as a discourse marker (see 157) to suggest that
one thing is certain or all right, even if everything else is
unsatisfactory.

We lost everything in the fire, But at least nobody was hurt,

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark43>>7    not in the least

We can use not in the least in a formal style to mean ‘not at all*,
especially when talking about personal feelings and reactions.

I was not in the least upset by her bad temper.

For less and fewer, see 320.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark44>>319    left

The past participle of leave -left- can be used in a special way, to
mean ‘remaining', ‘not used', ‘still there*.

What did you do with the money that was left?

After the explosion, only two people were left alive.

Left is common after there is and have got.

There's nothing left in the fridge,

I haven't got any money left: can you get the tickets?

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark45>>320    less and fewer

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark46>>1 the difference

Less is the comparative of little (used especially before uncountable
nouns). Fewer is the comparative of few (used before plural nouns).
Compare:

I earn less money than a postman.

I've got fewer problems than I used to have.

Less is quite common before plural nouns, as well as uncountables,
especially in an informal style. Some people consider this incorrect.

I've got less problems than 1 used to have.    »

lest 321

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark47>>2    less/fewer with and without of

Less of and fewer of axe used before determiners (like the, my or this)
and pronouns.

I'd like to spend less of my time answering letters.

At the college reunions, there are fewer of us each year.

Before nouns without determiners, of is not used.

If you want to lose weight_{t} eat less food, (not ... less of food?)

Fewer people make their own bread these days. (not Fewer of people...)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark48>>3    less and fewer without nouns

Nouns can be dropped after less and fewer if the meaning is clear.

Some people go to church, but less!fewer than 20 years ago.

Less can be used as an adverb (the opposite of the adverb more).

I worry less than I used to.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark49>>4    lesser

Lesser is used in a few expressions (in a rather formal style) to mean
‘smaller' or 'not so much'.

the lesser of two evils a lesser-known writer

For little and few, see 329.

For least and feutest, see 318.

For the use of much, far, a lot etc with feiver and less, see 140.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark50>>321    lest

Lest has a similar meaning to in case (see 271) or so that... not (see
543). It is rare in British English, and is found mostly in older
literature and in ceremonial language. It is a little more common in
formal American English. They kept watch all night lest robbers should
come.

We must take care lest evil thoughts enter our hearts.

Lest can be followed by a subjunctive verb (see 567).

The government must act, lest the problem of child poverty grow worse.

For more about older English, see 392.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark51>>322    let (1): structures

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark52>>1 followed by infinitive without to

Let is followed by object + infinitive without to.

We usually let the children stay up late on Saturdays.

(not ... let the children to stay / staying...)

She didn't let me see what she was doing. (not .. . let me saw...)

Note the expressions let... know (= tell, inform) and let... have (=
send, give).

I'll let you know my holiday dates next week Could you let me have the
bill for the car repair?

Let go of means ‘stop holding'.

Don't let go of Mummy's hand.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark53>>2    not used in passives

Let is unusual in passive forms; we prefer allow.

After questioning he was allowed to go home.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark54>>3    with object + preposition / adverb
particle

Let can be followed by an object and a prepositional phrase or adverb
particle expressing movement.

You'd better let the dog out of the car.

Let him in, could you? Those kids let my tyres down.

For more about Infinitives without to, see 281.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark55>>323 let (2): introducing imperatives

Let can be used to introduce suggestions and orders, when these are not
addressed to the hearer/reader (or not only to the hearer/reader). This
structure can be considered a kind of imperative (see 268).

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark56>>1    first-person plural imperative:
let's...

We can use let us (formal) or let's (informal) to make suggestions or to
give orders to a group that includes the speaker.

Let us pray. Let's have a drink OK let's all get moving:

Shall we? is used as a question tag (see 487-488) in British English;
let's can be used as a short answer.

Let's go for a walk, shall we? ~ Yes, let's.

Negatives are let us not / do not let us (formal); let's not / don't
let's (informal). Let us not despair. (formal) Let's not get angry.
(informal)

Do not let us forget those who came before us. (formal)

Don't lefs stay up too late tonight, (informal)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark57>>2    first-person singular imperative: let
me ...

Let me is used to ‘give instructions to oneself; the expressions Let me
see and Let me think are very common.

What time shall we leave? ~Let me think. Yes, Eight o'clock will be OK.
What's the best way to Manchester? Let me see - suppose I take the M6.

Let me just get my coat and I'll be with you.

In a very informal style, let's is often used to mean let me (see also
429.6). Let's see. Suppose I take the M6 ...

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark58>>3    third-person imperative: let him ...

Let can also introduce a suggestion or order for someone or something
else, not the speaker or hearer. This is common in formal and ceremonial
language, but informal uses are also possible.    +

Let the prayers begin.

Let our enemies understand that we will not hesitate to defend our
territory. Your boyfriend's going out with another girl ~Let him. I
don't care.

Note the structure with let + the infinitive of there is.

Let there be no doubt in your minds about our intentions.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark59>>324    life: countable or uncountable noun

When we talk about life in general, or about a kind of life, life is
normally uncountable.

Life is complicated. Ann enjoys life.

I think I would enjoy city life. (not ... a city life.)

When we describe particular people's lives, life is normally countable.

My grandmother had a hard life, (not ... had hard life.)

My mother's parents lived interesting lives.

For more about countable and uncountable nouns, see 148.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark60>>325    like: verb

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark61>>1    not used in progressive forms

Like is not usually used in progressive forms (see 471).

What do you think of the soup? ~ I like it. (not ... Vm liking it)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark62>>2    not used without an object

Like cannot normally be used without an object.

How do you feel about ballet? like it (not ... I like.)

For exceptions, see paragraph 7 below.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark63>>3    very much: position

We can use very much with like, but not very alone.

I very much like ice cream, (not / very like ice cream.)

Very much does not come between like and its object (see 21).

I like you and your sister very much. or I very much like you and your
sister. (not I like very much you-and-your sister.)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark64>>4    like.. .ing: enjoyment

To talk about enjoying activities in general, we can use like...ing
(especially in BrE) or like + infinitive.

I really like walking J to walk in the woods.

Children always like listening t to listen to stories.

To talk about enjoying something on one occasion, we use like.. .ing.

I really liked working with him on his boat last week.

Like + object + verb is possible.

I don't like people phoning t to phone me in the middle of the night.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark65>>5    like + infinitive: choices and habits

We can use like + infinitive to talk about choices and habits.

I like to do the shopping early on Saturday mornings.

When Vm pouring tea I like to put the milk in first.

Not like to can mean ‘think it better not to'.

Why didn't you tell me before? ~I didn't like to disturb you at home.

Like + object + infinitive is possible.

She likes the children to go to bed early during the week

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark66>>6    would like

We use would like + infinitive as a polite way of saying ‘want',
especially in requests and offers.

Id like two kilos of tomatoes, please.

Would you like to dance? ~ Yes, OK (not Would you like dancing?...)

Do you like...? is not used in this way.

(not Do you like some more-coffee?)

Would like to can be used instead of repeating a whole infinitive (see
182).

How about playing tennis? ~ Yd like to.

Polite requests often begin If you would like ... ; the following clause
is sometimes dropped.

If you would like to take a seat, YU see if Mr Smithers is free.

If you would like to come this way...

Would is sometimes dropped in this structure.

If you like to come this way...

For ivould like with a perfect infinitive (e.g. / would like to have
seen that.), see 288.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark67>>7    if you like etc

When we offer people a choice, we often use like to mean ‘want (to)' in
subordinate clauses. Note that to is not used.

Can I go now? ~ If you like, (not If you like to.)

Do it any way you like. Come when you like.

You can sit wherever you like.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark68>>326 like and as: similarity, function

We can use like or as to say that things are similar. We can also use as
to talk about function - the jobs that people or things do.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark69>>1 like (similarity): like me

Like can be a preposition. We use like, not as, before a noun or pronoun
to talk about similarity.

like + noun/pronoun

My sister looks like me. (not .. .-as-me.)

He ran like the wind, (not ... as the wind.)

Like his parents, he is a vegetarian,

We can use very, quite and other adverbs of degree before like.

He's very like his father.    ►

She looks a bit like Queen Victoria.

We can use like to give examples.

She'sgood at scientific subjects, like mathematics, (not .. .-as
mathematics.) In mountainous countries, like Peru,...

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark70>>2    as (similarity): as I do

As is a conjunction. We use it before a clause, and before an expression
beginning with a preposition.

as + clause

as + preposition phrase Nobody knows her as I do.

We often drink tea with the meal, as they do in China.

In 1939, as in 1914, everybody seemed to want war.

On Friday, as on Tuesday, the meeting will be at 8.30.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark71>>3    like I do (informal)

In modem English, like is often used as a conjunction instead of as.
This is most common in an informal style.

Nobody loves you like I do.

You look exactly like your mother did when she was 20.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark72>>4    inverted word order: as did all his
family

In a very formal style, as is sometimes followed by auxiliary verb +
subject (note the inverted word order - see 302).

She was a Catholic, as were most of her friends.

He believed, as did all his family, that the king was their supreme
lord.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark73>>5    as you know etc

Some expressions beginning with as are used to introduce facts which are
‘common ground' - known to both speaker/writer and listener/reader.
Examples are as you know, as we agreed, as you suggested.

As you know, next Tuesday's meeting has been cancelled.

I am sending you the bill for the repairs, as we agreed.

There are some passive expressions of this kind - for example as is well
known; as was agreed. Note that there is no subject it after as in these
expressions (see 581).

As is well known, more people get colds in wet weather, (not As it is
well known ...)

I am sending you the bill, as was agreed, (not ... as it was agreed.)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark74>>6    comparison with as and like after
negatives

After a negative clause, a comparison with as or like usually refers
only to the positive part of what comes before.

I don't smoke, like Jane. (Jane smokes.)

I am not a Conservative, like Joe. (Joe is a Conservative.)

Before a negative clause, the comparison refers to the whole clause.

Like Mary, I don't smoke. (Mary doesn't smoke.)

Like Bill, I am not a Conservative. (Bill is not a Conservative.)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark75>>7 function or role: He worked as a waiter

Another use of as is to say what function or role a person or thing has
- what jobs people do, what purposes things are used for, what category
they belong to, etc. In this case, as is a preposition, used before a
noun.

He worked as a waiter for two years, (not ... like a waiter:)

Please don't use that knife as a screwdriver.

A crocodile starts life as an egg.

Compare this use of as with like.

As your brother, I must warn you to be careful (I am your brother.)

Like your brother, I must warn you to be careful (I am not your brother,
but he and I have similar attitudes.)

Note that as is usually pronounced /az/ (see 616).

For comparisons with as ... as_{t} see 136.    For alike, see 34.

For like used instead of as if, see 74.    For the same as, see 503.

For What... like?, see 253.    For such as, see 508.6.

For like used to join two infinitive structures, see 281.4.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark76>>327    likely

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark77>>1    meaning

Likely is an adjective with a similar meaning to probable.

I don't think a Labour victory is likely. The opposite is unlikely.

What's a likely date for the election? Snow is very unlikely.

Note also the informal adverb phrases very/most likely.

I think shell very/most likely be late.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark78>>2    it is (un)likely + that-clause

We can use it as a preparatory subject or object for a that-clause (see
446.7). It's likely that the meeting will go on late.

I thought it unlikely that she would come back.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark79>>3    infinitive after be (un)likely

Be + (un)likely is often followed by an infinitive.

Vm likely to be busy tomorrow.

Do you think it's likely to rain? He's unlikely to agree.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark80>>328    link verbs: be, seem, look etc

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark81>>1    common link verbs

Some verbs are used to join an adjective or noun complement to a
subject. These verbs can be called ‘link verbs', ‘copulas' or ‘copular
verbs'. Common examples: be, seem, appear, look, sound, smell, taste,
feel, become, get The weather is horrible. I do feel a fool That car
looks fast.    She became a racehorse trainer.

The stew smells good. It's getting late.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark82>>2    adjectives after link verbs

After link verbs we use adjectives, not adverbs. Compare:    ►

He spoke intelligently. (Intelligently is an adverb. It tells you about
how the person spoke.)

He seems intelligent (Intelligent is an adjective. It tells you about
the person himself - rather like saying He is intelligent Seem is a link
verb.)

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark83>>3    other uses

Some of these verbs are also used with other meanings as ordinary
non-link verbs. They are then used with adverbs, not adjectives.
Compare:

The problem appeared impossible, (not ... impossibly:)

Isabel suddenly appeared in the doorway, (not .. -sudden-...)

Other verbs used in two ways like this are look (see 331), taste (see
577) and feel (see 202).

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark84>>4    change

Some link verbs are used to talk about change, or the absence of change.
The most common are: become, get, grow, go, turn, stay, remain, keep.

It^{r}s becoming colder.    It's growing colder.

How does she stay so young?    Keep calm.

It's getting colder.    The leaves are going brown.

I hope you will always remain so happy. The leaves are turning brown.
For the differences between these verbs, see 128.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark85>>5    other verbs followed by adjectives

Sometimes other verbs, too, can be followed by adjectives. This happens
when we are really describing the subject of the sentence, and not the
action of the verb. It is common in descriptions with sit_{t} stand,
lie, fall.

The valley lay quiet and peaceful in the sun.

She sat motionless, waiting for their decision.

He fell unconscious on the floor, (not ... unconsciously...)

Adjectives can also be used in the structure verb + object + adjective,
to describe the object of the verb.

New SUPER GUB washes clothes SUPER WHITE. (NOT ... WIUTELY ...) He
pulled his belt tight and started off. (not. .. tightly...)

For the difference between adjectives and adverbs, see 26.

For cases tike drive slow, think positive, see 27.2,4.

For more about structures after verbs, see 606.

See also the entries for particular link verbs.

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark86>>329 (a) little and (a) few

<<main-20.xhtml#bookmark87>>1    uncountable and plural

We use the determiner (a) little with singular (usually uncountable)
words, and we use (a) few with plurals. Compare:

I have little interest in politics. Few politicians are really honest
We've got a little bacon and a few eggs.

<<main-21.xhtml>>

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    of after (a) little and (a) few

We use (a) little of and (a) few of before a pronoun or determiner (for
example the, my, these-see 154).

Compare:

-    Few people can say that they always tell the truth.

Few of us can say that we always tell the truth.

-    Could I try a little wine?

Could I try a little of your wine?

-    Only a few children like maths.

Only a few of the children in this class like maths.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    use of a

There is a difference between little and a little, and between few and a
few. Without a, little and few usually have rather negative meanings.
They may suggest ‘not as much/many as one would like\ ‘not as much/many
as expected', and similar ideas.

The average MP has little real power.

Few people can speak a foreign language perfectly.

A little and a few are more positive: their meaning is generally closer
to some. They may suggest ideas like ‘better than nothing' or ‘more than
expected'. Would you like a little soup?

You don't need to go shopping We've got a few potatoes and some steak.
Compare:

-    Cactuses need little water. (not much water)

Give the roses a little water every day. (not a lot, but some)

-    His ideas are difficult and few people understand them.

His ideas are difficult but a few people understand them.

Quite a few (informal) means ‘a considerable number'.

We've got quite a few friends in the village.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark2>>4    formal and informal language

Little and few (with no article) are rather formal. In an informal style
(e.g. ordinary conversation), we generally prefer not much/many, or only
a little/few. Come on! We haven't got much time!

Only a few people speak a foreign language perfectly.

However, very little and very few are possible in an informal style.

He's got very little patience and very few friends.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark3>>5    (a) little and (a) few without nouns

We can drop a noun and use (a) little/few alone, if the meaning is
clear.

Some more soup? ~Just a little, please.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark4>>6    not used after be

(A) little and (a) few are determiners (see 154). They are normally used
before nouns, but not after be.

They had little hope, (but not Their hope was little.)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark5>>7    (a) little with adjectives and adverbs

(A) little can modify comparatives.

How are you? ~i4 little better, thanks.

The new model is little faster than the old one.    ►

Little is not normally used to modify other adjectives or adverbs.

It's not very interesting, (not It's little-interesting.)

A little can be used, like a bit (see 107), before adjectives and
adverbs with a critical or negative meaning.

You must forgive her - she's a little confused.

They arrived a little late.

Note also the expression little known,

He's studying the work of a little known German novelist.

For less and fewer. see 320.

For the adjective little, see 534.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark6>>330 long and (for) a long time

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark7>>1    long in questions and negatives

Long (meaning ‘(for) a long time') is most common in questions and
negative clauses, and with restrictive words like hardly_{t} seldom.

Have you been waiting long?

It doesn't take long to get to her house. She seldom stays long.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark8>>2    (for) a long time in affirmative clauses

In affirmative clauses we usually prefer (for) a long time.

I waited (for) a long time, but she didn't arrive, (not / waited long
...)

It takes a long time to get to her house, (not It-takes long...)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark9>>3    long in affirmative clauses

However, long is used in affirmative clauses with too, enough, as and
so, and in a few other common expressions.

The meeting went on much too long.

Vve been working here long enough. Time to get a new job.

You can stay as long as you want.

Sorry I took so long. Ill be back before long.

She sits dreaming all day long, (also all night/weekJyear long)

Long is also used in affirmative clauses to modify adverbs and
conjunctions. We used to live in Paris, but that was long before you
were bom.

Long after the accident he used to dream that he was dying.

Long ago, in a distant country, there lived a beautiful princess.

(rather formal)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark10>>4    for a long time in negative clauses

When for a long time is used in a negative clause, it sometimes has a
different meaning from for long. Compare:

-    She didn't speak for long. (= She only spoke for a short time.)

She didn't speak for a long time. (= She was silent for a long time.)

-    He didn't work for long. (= He soon stopped working.)

He didn't work for a long time: (= He was unemployed for a long time.)
The reason for the difference is to do with the ‘scope of negation*: in
the first and third sentences, not goes with for long, but in the second
and fourth for a long time is outside the influence of not (it could go
at the beginning of the clause).

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark11>>5    How long are you here fori

Questions like How long are you here for? refer to the future. Compare:

How long are you here for? ~ Until the end of next week.

How long have you been here for? ~ Since last Monday.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark12>>6    comparative

The comparative of for a long time is (for) longer.

I hope you'll stay longer next time, (not ... for a longer time.)

For no longer, see 379.

Much, many and far are also more common in questions and negadve clauses
(see 357 and 200).

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark13>>331 look

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark14>>1    link verb (= 'seem')

Look can mean 'seem' or 'appear'. In this case it is a link verb (see
328) and can be followed by adjectives or nouns.

You look angry - what's the matter? (not You look angrily...)

I looked a real fool when I fell in the river The garden looks a mess To
talk about a temporary appearance, we can use simple or progressive
forms; there is not much difference of meaning.

You look / You're looking very unhappy. What's the matter?

Look can be followed by like or as if (see 74). Progressive forms are
not usually used in this case.

She looks like her mother.

It looks as if it's going to rain, (not It's looking as if...)

She looks as if she's dreaming.

She looks like she's dreaming; (informal) (not She looks like-dreaming.)
Look like.. .ing... (informal) is used with future reference in British
English.

It looks like being a wet night. (= It looks as if it will be ...)

Look + infinitive is also sometimes used in informal British English.

The team look to repeat their success. (= It looks as if they will...)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark15>>2    ordinary verb = ('direct one's eyes')

When look means 'direct one's eyes', it is used with adverbs, not
adjectives. Before an object, a preposition is necessary (usually at).

The boss looked at me angrily, (not The boss looked at-me angry.)

A preposition is not used when there is no object.

Look! It's changing colour. (not hook-ath...)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark16>>3    not followed by if

Before if or whether, we use see or look to see, not look.

Could you see if Ann's in the kitchen? (not Could you look if Ann's in
the kitchen?)

What are you doing? ~/'m looking to see whether these batteries are OK.
(not I'm looking whether...)    »

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark17>>4 look after and look for; fetch

These are not the same. Look after means ‘take care of; look for means
‘try to find'. Compare:

Could you look after the kids while I go shopping?

I spent ages looking for her before I found her.

We use fetch, not look for, if we know where people or things are.

I'm going to the station at three o'clock to fetch Daniel (not ..
-to-lo&k-for Daniel)

For other uses of look, see a good dictionary.

For the difference between look (at), match and see, see 506.

For Look! and Look here! used in arguments, see 157.19.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark18>>332    lose and loose

Lose (pronounced flu:zj) is an irregular verb {lose - lost - lost).

Loose (pronounced /lu:s/) is an adjective (the opposite of tight).

I must be losing weight - my clothes all feel loose, (not I
must-be-loosing weight-..)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark19>>333    [a] lot, lots, plenty, a great deal,
a large amount, a large number, the majority

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark20>>1    introduction; use of of

These expressions have similar meanings to the determiners much, many
and most, but the grammar is not quite the same. In particular! of is
used after these expressions even before nouns with no determiner.
Compare:

-    There's not a lot of meat left. (not There-s-not-a lot meat left.)

There's not much meat left. (not Tkere\^s-not much of meat left.)

-    Plenty of shops open on Sunday mornings. (not Plenty shops...)

Many shops open on Sunday mornings, (not Many of shops...)

For much, many and most with and without of, and other details of their
use, see 356-357.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark21>>2    a lot of and lots of

These are rather informal. In a more formal style, we prefer a great
deal of, a large number of, much or many. (Much and many are used mostly
in questions and negative clauses - see 357.) There is not much
difference between a lot of and lots of they are both used mainly before
singular uncountable and plural nouns, and before pronouns. It is the
subject, and not the form lot/lots, that makes a following verb singular
or plural. So when a lot of is used before a plural subject, the verb is
plural; when lots of is used before a singular subject, the verb is
singular.

A lot of time is needed to learn a language.

Lots of patience is needed, too. (not Lots of patience are needed, too.)

A lot of my friends want to emigrate, (not A lot of my friends wants...)
Lots of us think it's time for an election.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark22>>3    plenty of

Plenty of is usually rather informal. It is used mostly before singular
uncountables and plurals. It suggests ‘enough and more'.

Don't rush. There's plenty of time. Plenty of shops take cheques.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark23>>4    a great deal of, a large amount of and
a large number of

These are used in similar ways to a lot of and lots of but are more
formal.

A great deal of and a large amount of axe generally used with
uncountable nouns.

Mr Lucas has spent a great deal of time in the Far East.

Vve thrown out a large amount of old clothing.

A large number of is used before plurals, and a following verb is
plural.

A large number of problems still have to be solved. (More natural than A
large amount of problems ... or A great deal of problems ...)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark24>>5    the majority of

The majority of(- ‘most' or ‘most of') is mostly used with plural nouns
and verbs.

The majority of criminals are non-violent.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark25>>6    measurement nouns

These expressions are not generally used before words for units of
measure, like pounds, years or miles. Other words have to be used.

It cost several pounds, (not It cost a lot of pounds.)

They lived many miles from the town, (not They lived-plenty-of
miles-from

me tu wrt.)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark26>>7    use without following nouns

These expressions can be used without nouns if the meaning is clear. In
this case, of is not used.

How much did it cost? \^A lot. (= A lot of money.)

We should be all right for cheese - Vve bought plenty.

He does not often speak, but when he does he says a great deal.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark27>>8    use as adverbs

A lot and a great deal can be used as adverbs.

On holiday we walk and swim a lot (but not .. .-we-walk plenty or ..
.swim

tet$r)

The government seems to change its mind a great deal

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark28>>334 loudly and aloud

Loudly is used (like loud) to talk about the strength of a noise. The
opposite is quietly.

They were talking so loudly I couldn't hear myself think.    »

Aloud is often used with the words read and think, to say that words are
spoken, and not just ‘said^{1} silently in the head.

She has a very good pronunciation when she reads aloud.

What did you say? ~ Oh, nothing. I was just thinking aloud

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark29>>335    make: causative structures

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark30>>1    object + infinitive

After make + object, we use the infinitive without to (see 281).

I made her cry. (not I madeher-to-cry. or / made-ker crying)

Note that the infinitive must follow the object.

I can't make the washing machine work, (not I can't make-work the
washing machine.)

In passive structures the infinitive with to is used.

She was made to repeat the whole story.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark31>>2    make onself understood, etc

In a few cases make can be followed by myself, yourself etc and a past
participle. The structure is common with understood and heard.

I don't speak good French, but I can make myself understood, (not ...
make myself understand.)

She had to shout to make herself heard.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark32>>3    with object + object complement: make
people welcome etc

We can talk about an effect or change with make + object +
adjective/noun (see 607).

She made everybody welcome.

The rain made the grass wet. (not The rain made wet-the-gmss.)

We do not use make ...be in this structure.

You have made me a happy man. (not You have-mademe-be-a happy man.)

For other structures and the difference between make and do, see 160.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark33>>336    make: prepositions

We usually say that something is made of a. particular material.

Most things seem to be made of plastic these days.

All our furniture is made of wood.

When a material is changed into a completely different form to make
something, we often use make from.

Paper is made from wood, (not Paper is made of wood.)

When we talk about the process of manufacture, we can also use out of He
made all the window-frames out of oak; it took a long time.

To mention one of several materials (e.g. in cooking), we can use make
with. The soup's good. ~ Yes, I make it with lots of garlic.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark34>>337    marry and divorce

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark35>>1    get married/divorced

In an informal style, get married and get divorced are more common than
marry and divorce when there is no object.

Lulu and Joe got married last week. [Lulu and Joe married... is more
formal.)

The Robinsons are getting divorced.

In a more formal style, marry and divorce are preferred.

Although she had many lovers, she never married.

After three very unhappy years they divorced.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark36>>2    no preposition before object

Before a direct object, marry and divorce are used without prepositions.

She married a builder, (not She married with a builder.)

Andrew's going to divorce Carola.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark37>>3    get/be married to

We can also use get/be married to with an object.

She got married to her childhood sweetheart.

Vve been married to you for 25 years and I still don't understand you.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark38>>338    may and might (1): introduction

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark39>>1 grammar

May and might are modal auxiliary verbs (see 353-354).

a There is no -s in the third person singular.

She may be here tomorrow. (not She mays...)

It might rain this afternoon.

b Questions and negatives are made without do.

May I help you? (not Do I may...)

We might not be home before midnight.

c After may and might we use the infinitive of other verbs, without to.

You may be right, (not You may to be right.)

She might not want to come with us.

d May and might do not have infinitives or participles (to may, maying,
mighted do not exist). When necessary, we use other words.

She wants to be allowed to open a bank account. (not .. -to-may-open...)

e Might does not normally have a past meaning. It is used in the same
way as may to talk about the present and future. The difference is that
might usually refers to situations which are less probable or less
definite (see 339.2 and 340.1). Might also replaces may in past indirect
speech (see 275).    *

f However, certain past ideas can be expressed by may or might followed
by a perfect infinitive (have + past participle).

She's late. I think she may have missed the train.

Why did you do that? You might have killed yourself.

g Might has a contracted negative mightn't (see 143). Mayn't is very
unusual.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark40>>2 meanings

May and might are used mainly to talk about the chances of something
happening, and to ask for and give permission (especially in a more
formal style).

I may see you tomorrow.

Do you think I might borrow your typewriter?

Can and could are often used in similar ways to may and might. For the
main differences, see 345. For may and might after so that and in order
that, see 543.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark41>>339 may and might (2): chances etc

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark42>>1    chances: You may be right, We may go
climbing

We often use may and might to talk about the chance (possibility) that
something will happen, or is happening.

We may go climbing in the Alps next summer.

Peter might phone. If he does, ask him to ring later.

I think Labour are going to win. ~ You may be right.

Where's Emma? \^ I don't know. She might be out shopping, I suppose. May
well and might well suggest stronger possibilities.

I think it's going to rain. ~ You may well be right - the sky's really
black.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark43>>2    may and might, the difference

Might is not often used as a past form of may. both may and might are
used to talk about the present or future. Might is mostly used as a less
definite or more hesitant form of may, suggesting a smaller chance - it
is used when people think something is possible but not very likely.
Compare:

I may go to London tomorrow. (perhaps a 50% chance)

Joe might come with me. (perhaps a 30% chance)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark44>>3    questions: may not used

May is not normally used to ask about the chance of something happening.
Are you likely to go camping this summer? (not Mayyou-go camping...?)
Has Emma gone shopping, I wonder? (not May-Emma-have-gone

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

But may is possible in indirect questions (for example after Do you
think).

Do you think you may go camping this summer?

Might can be used in direct questions, but this is rather formal.

Might you go camping? (less natural than Do you think you may/might...?)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark45>>4    two negatives: may/might not and can't

There are two ways to make may/might negative: with may/might not (= It
is possible that... not.. J and with can't (= It is not possible
that...) Compare:

-    She may be at home. (= Perhaps she is at home.)

She may not be at home. (= Perhaps she is not at home.)

She can't be at home. (= She is certainly not at home.)

-    You might win. (= Perhaps you will win.)

You might not win. (= Perhaps you won't win.)

You can't win. (= You certainly won't win.)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark46>>5    might meaning 'would perhaps'

Might (but not may) can have a conditional meaning (= would perhaps).

If you went to bed for an hour, you might feel better.

(= ... perhaps you would feel better.)

Don't play with knives. You might get hurt. (= Perhaps you would get
hurt.)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark47>>6    indirect speech: might

Might is used in past indirect speech when may was used in direct
speech.

I may go to Scotland. ~ What? ~ I said I might go to Scotland.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark48>>7    past: might + infinitive not used

Might + infinitive is not normally used to talk about past possibility
(except in indirect speech).

I felt very hot and tired. Perhaps I was ill. (not ... I might be ill.)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark49>>8    may/might have...: She may have missed
her train

However, to say that it is possible that something happened or was true
in the past, we can use mayfmight have + past participle.

Polly's very late. ** She may have missed her train. (= It is possible
that she missed ...)

What was that noise? ~It might have been a cat.

May/might have ... can sometimes refer to the present or future.

I'll try phoning him, but he may have gone out by now.

By the end of this year I might have saved some money.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark50>>9    might have ..You might have killed
yourself

To say that something was possible but did not happen, we can use might
have ...

You were stupid to try climbing up there. You might have killed yourself
If she hadn't been so bad-tempered, I might have married her.

May have... is now sometimes used with this meaning too; some people
feel that this is not correct.

You were stupid to try climbing up there. You may have killed yourself.
(More normal:... You might have killed yourself)

For might have ... used to criticise people for not doing things, see
344.

For the use of could have + past participle in similar senses, see
124.7.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark51>>10 another use of may/might typical
occurrences

In scientific and academic language, may is often used to talk about
typical occurrences - things that can happen in certain situations.

A female crocodile may lay 30-40 eggs.

The flowers may have five or six petals, pink or red in colour.

Children of divorced parents may have difficulty with relationships.

With this meaning, might can be used to talk about the past.

In those days, a man might be hanged for stealing a sheep.

Can and could are used in a similar way, but are less formal. See
122.2,4.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark52>>340 may and might (3): permission

May and might are used for permission mosdy in a formal style. They are
much less common than can and could.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark53>>1    asking for permission: May I put the TV
on?

May and might can both be used to ask for permission. Might is very
polite and formal, and is mostly used in indirect question structures.

May I put the TV on?

I wonder if 1 might have a little more cheese.

(More natural than Might I have...?)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark54>>2    giving and refusing permission: You
may/You may not

May is used to give permission; may not to refuse permission or forbid.

May I put the TV on? ~ Yes, of course you may.

May I borrow the car? ~7Vo, Vm afraid you may not.

Students may not use the staff car park Must not is also used to forbid
(see 360.3). It is a little stronger or more emphatic than may not

Students must not use the staff car park.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark55>>3    talking about permission

We do not usually use may and might to talk about permission which has
already been given or refused, about freedom which people already have,
or about rules and laws. Instead, we use can, could or be allowed.

These days, children can! are allowed to do what they like. (not ..
.-ehiteren may do what they like.)

I could / was allowed to read what I liked when I was a child (not f
might read what I liked...)

Can you / Are you allowed to park on both sides of the road here?

(More natural than May you park...?)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark56>>4    indirect speech

However, may and might can be used to report the giving of permission.
May is used after present reporting verbs, and might after past verbs.

The Manager says that we may leave our coats in the downstairs toilet.
What are you doing here? ~ Peter said that I might look round, (very
formal)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark57>>341    may and might (4): may in wishes and
hopes

May (but not might) is used in formal expressions of wishes and hopes.

I hope that the young couple may enjoy many years of happiness together.
Let us pray that peace may soon return to our troubled land.

May often comes at the beginning of the sentence.

May you both be very happy! May God be with you.

May the New Year bring you all your heart desires.

May she rest in peace, (prayer for a dead person)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark58>>342    may and might (5): may/might... but

May (and sometimes might) can be used in a discussion rather like
although or even if: to say that something is true, but that this makes
no difference to the main argument. They are often followed by but

He may be clever, but he hasn't got much common sense. (= Even if he's
clever, he ... OR Although he's clever, he ...)

It may be a comfortable car, but it uses a lot of petrol

She might have had a lovely voice when she was younger, but...

Note that in this structure, may and might can be used to talk about
things that are definitely true, not just possible.

You may be my boss, but that doesn't mean you're better than me.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark59>>343    may and might (6): may/might as well

This structure is used informally to suggest that one should do
something because there is nothing better, nothing more interesting or
nothing more useful to do. There is little difference between may and
might in this case. There's nobody interesting to talk to. We may as
well go home.

Shall we go and see Fred? ~ OK, might as well.

Note the difference between may!might as well and had better (see 230).
Compare:

We may as well have something to eat.

(= There is nothing more interesting to do.)

We'd better have something to eat.

(= We ought to eat; there is a good reason to eat now.)

Might as well is also used to compare one unpleasant situation with
another. This holiday isn't much fun. We might just as well be back
home. {- Things wouldn't be any different if we were at home.)

You never listen -1 might as well talk to a brick wall

344    may and might (7):

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark60>>requests, suggestions and criticisms

Might is often used in affirmative clauses to make requests and
suggestions. You might see if John's free this evening.

You might try asking your uncle for a job.    ►

The structure can be used to criticise. Might have + past participle is
used to talk about the past.

You might ask before you borrow my car.

She might have told me she was going to stay out all night.

For the use of could in similar senses, see 124.7.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark61>>345 may and might (8): may/might and
can/could

May/might are often used in similar ways to can/could. The main
differences are as follows. For more details of these uses, see 121-124
and 338-340.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark62>>1    permission: can/could more common

Can and could are more common than may and might, which are used mostly
in a formal style. Compare:

Can I look at your paper?

Excuse me, may I look at your newspaper for a moment?

There is an old belief that may/might are more ^{4}correct' than
can/could in this case> but this does not reflect normal usage.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark63>>2    'general' possibility: can/could, not
may/might

We normally use can and could to say that things are possible in
general: people are able to do them, the situation makes them possible,
or there is nothing to stop them (see 122). May and might are not used
in this way. She's lived in France; that's why she can speak French (not
.. -that's why she may speak French.)

These roses can grow anywhere. (not These reses-may-grow anywhere.)

Can gases freeze? (not May gases freeze?)

In those days, everybody could find a job. (not ... everybody might find
a job:)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark64>>3    chances: may/might/could, not can

To talk about the chance (possibility) that something will happen, or is
happening, we use may, might or could, but not can.

Where's Sarah? *She may be with foe. (not She-eart-be...)

We may go to the Alps next summer. (not We can go.. .-next summer.)
Might and could suggest a less strong possibility.

It might/could rain this evening, but I think it probably won't.

May is not used in direct questions with this meaning.

Do you think you'll go to the Alps? (not Mayyou go ...?)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark65>>4    negative sentences: may/might not and
can/could not

Mayfmight not means ‘perhaps ... not.. /

Can/could not can mean ‘it is certain that... not.. / (see 359.2).

Compare:

-    It may/might not rain tomorrow. (= Perhaps it will not rain.)

It can't/couldn't possibly rain tomorrow. (= It will certainly not
rain.)

-    It may not be true. (= Perhaps it is not true.)

It can't be true. (= It is certainly not true.)

- He mayJmight not have understood. (= Perhaps he did not understand.)

He can't/couldn't have understood. (= He certainly did not understand.)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark66>>346    maybe and perhaps

These two words mean the same. They are both common. In British English,
perhaps is used more often than maybe in a formal style.

Maybe/Perhaps it'll stop raining soon.

Julius Caesar is perhaps the greatest of Shakespeare's early plays.

Perhaps is often pronounced 'praps' by British people.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark67>>347    meals

There are regional and social differences in the names for meals.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark68>>1    British usage

a midday: dinner or lunch

The midday meal is often called dinner, especially if it is the main
meal of the day. People who are ‘higher' in the social scale usually
call it lunch

b afternoon: tea

Some people have a light meal of tea and biscuits or cakes, called
tea_{t} at four or five o'clock in the afternoon.

c early evening: (high) tea or supper

Many people have a cooked meal around five or six o'clock. This is often
called tea or high tea; some people call it supper.

d later evening: supper or dinner

A meal later in the evening is often called supper (and some people use
the same word for a bedtime snack). Some people use dinner for the
evening meed if it is the main meal of the day. A more formal evening
meal with guests, or in a restaurant, is usually called dinner.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark69>>2    American usage

Americans generally use lunch for the midday meal and dinner or supper
for the evening meal. However in rural areas it is still common for the
main meed of the day to be eaten at midday and called ‘dinner', with the
evening meal being called ‘supper'. Celebration meals at Christmas and
Thanksgiving are called Christmas/Thanksgiving dinner, even if they are
eaten at midday.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark70>>348    mean

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark71>>1 questions

Note the structure of questions with mean.

Excuse me. What does *hermetic' mean? (not What means ‘hermetic'?) »

Note also the preposition in What do you mean by 'hermetic*? (= In what
sense are you using the word?)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark72>>2    mean and think, meaning and opinion

Mean and meaning are ‘false friends' for speakers of some European
languages. They are not usually used for 'think' or ‘opinion'.

I think that Labour will win the next election, (not I mean that Labour
will wm-...)

What's your opinion? (not What's your meaning?)

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark73>>3    structures

Mean (= intend, plan) can be followed by (object) + infinitive.

Sorry -1 didn't mean to interrupt you.

Did you mean John to post those letters?

Mean (= involve, have as a result) can be followed by a noun or .. .ing.

The Fantasians have invaded Utopia This means war!

If you decide to try the exam, it will mean studying hard.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark74>>4    I mean

I mean is used informally as a ‘discourse marker' (see 157) to introduce
explanations or additional details.

He's funny -1 mean, he's really strange.

It was a terrible evening. I mean, they all sat round and talked
politics. Would you like to come out tonight? I mean, only if you want
to, of course. When I mean introduces a comment it can be close to I
think or I feel_{t} but it is not followed by that.

A hundred pounds for a thirty hour week. I mean, it's not right, is it?

(but not I mean that it's not right...)

In informal speech, I mean often acts as a connector or ‘filler', with
little real meaning.

Let's go and see Phil on Saturday. I mean, we could make an early
start... I mean is also used to introduce corrections.

She lives in Southport -1 mean Southampton.

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark75>>5    What do you mean ...?

What do you mean ...? can express anger or protest.

What do you mean, I can't sing?

What do you mean by waking me up at this time of night?

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark76>>6    no progressive form

Mean is not normally used in progressive forms when it refers to
meanings. What does that strange smile mean? (not What is that-strange
smHe meaning?)

But perfect progressive forms can be used to refer to intentions.

I've been meaning to phone you for weeks.

measurements: ‘marked' and ‘unmarked' forms 350

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark77>>349    means

<<main-21.xhtml#bookmark78>>1    singular and plural ending in -s

Both the singular and the plural of means end in -s.

In the 19th century a new means of communication was developed - the
railway, (not ... a new mean-of-communication ...)

There are several means of transport on the island.

For other words with singular forms ending in -s. see 524.3.

<<main-22.xhtml>>

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    by all/any/no means

By all means is not the same as by all possible means. It is used to
give permission or to encourage somebody to do something, and means ‘of
course' or ‘it is all right to ..Compare:

Can I borrow your sweater? ~By all means.

By all means get a new coat, but don't spend more than £80.

We must help her by all possible means, (not We must help-her-by-att
means.)

By no means (or not by any means) is not the opposite of by all means.
It is similar to definitely not, or not by a long way.

Is that all you've got to say? ---By no means.

Galileo was by no means the first person to use a telescope.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark1>>350    measurements: 'marked' and 'unmarked'
forms

Many adjectives that are used in measurements come in pairs (e.g.
talHshort, old/young, heavy/light, fast/slow). The word that is used for
the ‘top' end of the measurement scale can usually be used in another
sense, to talk about the quality in general. For instance, one can ask
how long something is even if it is relatively short. Grammarians call
these uses ‘unmarked'. Compare:

-    She's very tall and he's very short, (marked)

Exactly how tall are they both? (unmarked) (not Exaetiy-how
short-are-they both?)

-    Will you still love me when Vm old? (marked)

He's only twenty-three years old (unmarked) (not ... twenty-three years
young.)

-    Lead is one of the heaviest metals. (marked)

Scales are used to measure how heavy things are. (unmarked) (not ..how
light-thtngs-are,:■)

Some nouns are used in similar ‘unmarked' ways. Compare:

-    Age brings wisdom but Id rather have youth and stupidity, (marked)

What is her exact age? (unmarked) (not What-ts-her exact youth?)

-    The worst thing about the film was its length, (marked)

What's the length of a football field? (unmarked) (not Wkat-s the

shortness ...?)    »>

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark2>>351    mind: do you mind etc

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark3>>1    meaning and use

Mind can mean 'dislike', ‘be annoyed by\ ‘object to'. We use mind mosdy
in questions and negative clauses.

Do you mind the smell of tobacco? ---Not at all Do you mind if we leave
a bit earlier today?

I don't mind if you use my can After mind, we can use an -ing form, or
object + -ing form.

Do you mind waiting a few minutes? (not ... to wait'...)

I don't mind you coming in late if you don't wake me up.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    Would you mind...?

We can use Would you mind... ? to ask people to do things, or to ask for
permission.

Would you mind opening the window? (= Please open ...)

Would you mind if I opened the window?

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    Do/Would you mind my.. .ing?

In a formal style, we sometimes use my, your etc with an -ing form after
mind (see 295.3,4).

Do you mind my smoking? (More common: ...me smoking? or ... if I smokeT)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark6>>4    answers

‘After Would/Do you mind ...?, we use No or Not at all (more formal) to
give permission (but we often add more words to make the meaning quite
clear). Do you mind if J look at your paper? - No, please do / that's OK
I sure.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark7>>5    tenses

In subordinate clauses after mind, a present tense is usually used if we
want to express a future meaning (see 580).

I don't mind what you do after you leave school (not I don't mind
what-you will do ...)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark8>>352    miss

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark9>>1 'fail to contact*, 'be late for*

Miss often expresses the idea of failing to contact somebody/something,
or being late for somebody/something.

How could he miss an easy goal like that?

The station's about five minutes' walk, straight ahead. You can't miss
it.

If you don't hurry we'll miss the train. (not ... lose the train.)

You've just missed her - she went home five minutes ago.

An -ing form can be used after miss.

I got in too late and missed seeing the news on TV.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark10>>2    'be sorry to be without*

We can use miss to say that we are sorry because we are no longer with
somebody, or no longer have something.

Will you miss me when Vm away?

He's not happy in the country - he misses city life.

Note that regret is not used in the same way. Compare:

I miss working with you. (= I'm sorry I'm no longer with you.)

I regret working with you. (= I'm sorry I was with you.)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark11>>3    'notice the absence of

Another meaning of miss is ‘notice that somebody/something is not
there'. The child ran away in the morning, but nobody missed her for
hours.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark12>>4    miss not used

Miss is not used simply to say that somebody has not got something.

In some of the villages they haven't got electricity.

(not ... they-miss-electricity.)

In a formal style, the verb or noun lack can be used to express this
idea.

... they lack electricity.

I am sorry that lack of time prevents me from giving more details.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark13>>5    missing

Missing is often used as an adjective, meaning ‘lost'.

When did you realise that the money was missing?

The missing children were Jbund at their aunt's house.

We can use missing after a noun. This often happens in clauses beginning
with there is.

There's a page missing from this booh In an informal style, a structure
with have... missing is also possible.

We've got some plates missing - do you think Alan's borrowed them?

He had several teeth missing.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark14>>353 modal auxiliary verbs: introduction

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark15>>1    What are modal auxiliary verbs?

The verbs can_{t} could, may, might, will_{f} would, shall (mainly
British English), should, must and ought are called ‘modal auxiliary
verbs'. They are used before the infinitives of other verbs, and add
certain kinds of meaning connected with certainty, or with obligation
and freedom to act (see next section).

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark16>>2    grammar

a Modal verbs have no -s in the third person singular.

She may know his address. (not She-mays ...)

b Questions, negatives, tags and short answers are made without do.

Can you swim? (not Do yott'Can swim) ~ Yes, I can

He shouldn't be doing that, should he? (not He doesn't should ...) ►

c After modal auxiliary verbs, we use the infinitive without to of other
verbs. Ought is an exception - see 403.

I must water the flowers. (not I must to water...)

Progressive, perfect and passive infinitives are also possible (see
280).

I may not be working tomorrow.

She was so angry she could have killed him.

The kitchen ought to be painted one of these days.

d Modal verbs do not have infinitives or participles [to-may, maying,
mayed do not exist), and they do not normally have past forms (though
would, could, should and might can sometimes be used as past tenses of
will_{f} can, shall and may). Other expressions are used when necessary.

I'd like to be able to skate, (not ... to can skate.)

People really had to work hard in those days, (not Pe&ph-really musted
work-...)

e However, certain past ideas can be expressed by a modal verb followed
by a perfect infinitive (have + past participle).

You should have told me you were coming.

I think I may have annoyed Aunt Mary.

For details of these uses, see the entries on particular modal verbs.

f Modal verbs have contracted negative forms (can't, won't etc) which
are used in an informal style. (Shan't and mayn't are only used in
British English; mayn't is very rare.) Will and would also have
contracted affirmative forms (7/, *d). For details, see 143. Some modals
have both ‘strong' and ‘weak' pronunciations. For details, see 616.

g There is quite often used as a preparatory subject with modal verbs,
especially when these are followed by be (see 586).

There may be rain later today.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark17>>3 meanings

We do not normally use modal verbs to say that situations definitely
exist or that particular events have definitely happened. We use them,
for example, to talk about things which we expect, which are or are not
possible, which we think are necessary, which we want to happen, which
we are not sure about, which tend to happen, or which have not happened.

He may arrive any time.

She could be in London or Paris or Tokyo - nobody knows.

I can't swim.

I think you ought to see a lawyer.

We really must tidy up the garden.

What would you do if you had a free year?

Edinburgh can be very cold in winter.

I think they should have consulted a doctor earlier.

You might have told me Frances was ilL

For further general information about the meanings of modal auxiliary
verbs, see next section. For more detailed information, see the sections
for each verb.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark18>>4 need and used to

Need (see 366) and used to (see 604) are sometimes used in similar ways
to modal verbs.

You needn't wait for me.

She used not to be so bad-tempered.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark19>>354 modal auxiliary verbs: meanings

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark20>>1    two kinds of meaning

Most of the meanings of modal verbs can be divided into two groups. One
is to do with degrees of certainty: modal verbs can be used to say for
instance that a situation is certain, probable, possible or impossible.
The other is to do with obligation, freedom to act and similar ideas:
modal verbs can be used to say that somebody is obliged to do something,
that he/she is able to do something, that there is nothing to stop
something happening, that it would be better if something happened (or
did not), or that something is permitted or forbidden.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark21>>2    degrees of certainty

Modal verbs can express various degrees of certainty about facts,
situations or events.

a complete certainty (positive or negative): shall, will_{t} must, can't

I shall be away tomorrow. There's the phone. That'll be Tony.

I shan't be late on Tuesday. Things will be all right.

It won't rain this evening. You must be tired.

That can't be John - he's in Dublin.

b probability (deduction; saying that something is logical or normal):
should_{t} ought to

She should / ought to be here soon.

It shouldn't / oughtn't to be difficult to get there.

c possibility (talking about the chances that something is true or will
happen): may

The water may not be warm enough to swim.

We may be buying a new house.

d weak possibility: might, could

I might see you again - who knows?

Things might not be as bad as they seem.

We could all be millionaires one day.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark22>>3    obligation and freedom to act

Modal verbs can express various aspects of obligation and freedom.
(These uses of modal verbs are very important in the polite expression
of requests, suggestions, invitations and instructions.)

a strong obligation: must, will, need

Students must register in the first week of term.

All sales staff will arrive for work by 8.40 a.m.

Need I get a visa for Hungary?    ►

b prohibition: must not, may not, cannot

Students must not use the staff car park.

Books may not be taken out of the library.

You can't come in here.

c weak obligation; recommendation: should, ought to, might, shall (in
questions)

You should try to work harder. You might see what John thinks. She
really outfit to wash her hair. What shall we do?

d willingness, volunteering, resolving, insisting and offering: will,
shall (in questions)

If you will come this way...

I'U pay for the drinks.    She will keep interrupting

people.

I'll definitely work harder next term. Shall I give you a hand?

e permission: can, could, may, might You can use the car if you like.

Could I talk to you for a minute?

May we use the phone?

Do you think I might take a break now?

f absence of obligation: needn't

You needn't work this Saturday.

g ability: can, could

She can speak six languages.

Anybody who wants to can join the club.

These roses can grow anywhere.

When I was a baby I could put my foot in my mouth.

You could get to my old school by bus, but not by train.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark23>>4    speaker's and hearer's point of view

Obligation, permission etc are usually seen from the speaker's point of
view in statements and the hearer's in questions. Compare:

-    You must go and see Ann. (I think it is necessary.)

Must you go and see Ann? (Do you think it is necessary?)

-    You can borrow my car. (I give permission.)

Can I borrow your car? (Will you give permission?)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark24>>5    forms in indirect speech, after if etc

Instead of can, will, shall and may, we use could, would, should and
might to express the same meanings in past indirect speech, (see 275),
in some sentences after */(see 258), and in 'future in the past'
sentences (see 221).

I knew it couldn't be John,

I told you you wouldn't be ready in time.

If you stopped criticising I might get some work done.

I should be grateful if you would let me know your decision as soon as
possible.

They knelt in front of the child who would one day rule all England.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark25>>6    other meanings

Besides the meanings discussed in paragraphs 2 and 3, will and would are
used to talk about habitual behaviour or activity (see 629, 633).

Most evenings he'll just sit in front of the TV and go to sleep.

When we were kids, my mum would take us out on bikes all round the
countryside.

Used to + infinitive (see 604) is similar to a modal verb structure in
some ways. It is used to talk about habitual behaviour or activity and
(unlike would) habitual states.

I used to play a lot of tennis when I was younger.

The grass used to look greener when I was a child.

(not The-grass- would look greener-when-Hvas a child.)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark26>>7    subject-independence

An interesting, rather complicated point about modal verbs is that their
meaning usually ‘spreads over' a whole clause. This means that one can
change a modal structure from active to passive, for example, without
affecting the meaning very much. Compare:

-    A child could understand his theory.

His theory could be understood by a child.

-    You mustn't put adverbs between the verb and the object.

Adverbs mustn't be put between the verb and the object.

-    Dogs may chase cats.

Cats may get chased by dogs.

With most other verbs that are followed by infinitives, their meaning is
attached to the subject, so that a change from active to passive changes
the sense of the sentence completely. Compare:

-    Dogs like to chase cats.

Cats like to be chased by dogs, (different and - of course - untrue)

-    Pete wants to phone Ann.

Ann wants to be phoned by Pete, (not the same meaning)

For more details of the use of the various modal verbs, see the entries
for each verb.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark27>>355 more

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark28>>1 more + noun

We can use more before a noun phrase as a determiner (see 154). We do
not generally use of when there is no other determiner (e.g. article or
possessive). We need more time, (not ... more of time.)

More university students are having to borrow money these days.

However, more of is used direcdy before personal and geographical names.

It would be nice to see more of Ray and Barbara.

Five hundred years ago, much more of Britain was covered with trees. »

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark29>>2    more of + determiner/pronoun

Before determiners (e.g. a, the, my, tfzis) and pronouns, we use more
of. Three more of the missing climbers have been found.

Could I have some more of that smoked fish?

I don't think any more of them want to come.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark30>>3    more without a noun

We can drop a noun after more if the meaning is clear.

I'd like some more, please.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark31>>4    one more etc

Note the structure one more, two more etc + noun phrase.

There's just one more river to cross.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark32>>5    more as an adverb

More can also be used as an adverb.

I couldn't agree more.

More and more is used to talk about continual increase.

I hate this job more and more as the years go by.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark33>>6    comparative structures

More is used to make the comparative forms of longer adjectives and most
adverbs (see 137-138).

As you get older you get more tolerant Please drive more slowly.

For no more, not any more/longer, see 379.

For far more, much more, many more etc, see 140.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark34>>356 most

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark35>>1    most (= 'the majority of') without of

Most can mean ‘the majority of. We do not use the before most with this
meaning.

Most children like ice cream, (not The most children ...)

We do not generally use of after most when there is no other determiner
(e.g. article or possessive).

Most cheese is made from cow's milk, (not Most of-cheese-...)

Most Swiss people understand French, (not Most of Swiss people...)
However, most of is used direcdy before personal and geographical names.
I've read most of Shakespeare.

The Romans conquered most of England

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark36>>2    most of + determiner/pronoun

Before determiners (e.g. a, the, my, this) and pronouns, we use most of.
Most of the people here know each other.

Most of my friends live abroad, (not Most my friends ...)

Most of us thought he was wrong.

He's eaten two pizzas and most of a cold chicken.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark37>>3    most without a noun

We can drop a noun after most if the meaning is clear.

Some people had difficulty with the lecture, hut most understood.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark38>>4    the most (= 'more than any
other/others') with nouns

In comparisons (when most means ‘more than any other/others') it is
normally used with the before nouns.

Susan found the most blackberries.

The is sometimes dropped in an informal style.

Who earns (the) most money in your family?

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark39>>5    (the) most as an adverb

(The) most can also be used as an adverb. The is often dropped in an
informal style.

They all talk a lot, but your little girl talks (the) most The truth
hurts most

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark40>>6    superlative adjectives and adverbs

(The) most is used to make the superlative forms of longer adjectives
and most adverbs (see 137-138).

I wasn't as clever as the others, but I was the most beautiful.

I work most efficiently in the early morning.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark41>>7    most meaning 'very*

Most can be used before adjectives to mean ‘very' in evaluating
expressions, especially in a formal style.

That is most kind of you. Thank you for a most interesting afternoon.
The experience was most distressing;

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark42>>8    mostly

Mostly means 'in most (but not all) cases'. Compare:

Your little girl talks the most (not ... talks mostly:)

She mostly talks about her friends.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark43>>357 much and many

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark44>>1    the difference

Much is used with singular (uncountable) nouns; many is used with
plurals.

I haven't got much time. I don't know many of your friends

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark45>>2    much/many + noun: without of

We do not generally use of after much/many when there is no other
determiner (e.g. article or possessive).

She didn't eat much breakfast, (not ... much of breakfast:)

There aren't many large glasses left, (not .. .many of large glasses
left.) However, much of is used directly before personal and
geographical names. Vve seen too much of Howard recently. Not much of
Denmark is hilly.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark46>>3    much/many of + determiner + noun

Before determiners (e.g. a, the, my, this) and pronouns, we use much of
and many of

You can't see much of a country in a week.

How much of the house do you want to paint this year?

I won't pass the exam: Vve missed too many of my lessons.

How many of you are there?

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark47>>4    much/many without a noun

We can drop a noun after much or many, if the meaning is clear.

You haven't eaten much.

Did you find any mushrooms? ~Not many.

Note that much and many are only used like this when a noun has been
dropped.

There wasn't much (food), but not The-food wasnH-mueh. (Because you
couldn't say The food wasr\^Hnuch food.)

Many is not usually used alone to mean ‘many people*.

Many people think it's time for a change.

(More natural than Many think ...)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark48>>5    not used in affirmative clauses

In an informal style, we use much and many mostly in questions and
negative clauses. In most affirmative clauses they are unusual
(especially much); other words and expressions are used instead.

How much money have you got? \^ Vve got plenty. (not Vve got much.) He's
got lots of men friends, but he doesn't know many women.

(More natural than He's got many men friends ...)

Did you buy any clothes? ~Yes, lots. (not Yes, many.)

In a formal style, much and many are more common in affirmative clauses.
Much has been written about unemployment In the opinion of many
economists, ...

Far and long (= a long time) are also used mostly in questions and
negative clauses. See 200 and 330.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark49>>6    after so, as, and too

So muchlmany, as much/many and too muchlmany are quite natural in
affirmative clauses.

There was so much traffic that it took me an hour to get home.

I play as much tennis as I can. You make too many mistakes.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark50>>7    much as adverb

We can use much as an adverb in questions and negative clauses.

Do you work much at weekends? I don't travel much these days.

We can also use much before comparative adjectives and adverbs, in
affirmative clauses as well as questions and negatives.

She's much older than her brother. I don't drive much faster than you.
Much can be used before some verbs expressing enjoyment, preference and
similar ideas, in affirmative clauses as well as questions and
negatives, especially in a formed style.

I much appreciate your help.

We much prefer the country to the town.

I didn't much enjoy the concert.

Very much can be used in affirmative clauses as an adverb, but not
usually before a noun. Compare:

I very much like your new hairstyle, (adverb)

Thank you very much, (adverb)

There's a whole lot of water coming under the door, (before noun)

(not Therms-very much-water coming...)

For much and very wiih past participles (e.g. much/very amused), see
410.4.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark51>>358 must (1): introduction

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark52>>1    grammar

Must is a modal auxiliary verb (see 353-354).

a There is no -s in the third person singular.

He must start coming on time. (not He musts...)

b Questions and negatives are made without do.

Must you go? (not Bo-you must go?)

You mustn't worry, (not You don't must worry.)

c After must, we use the infinitive without to of other verbs.

I must write to my mother. (not l-must-to-write...)

d Must has no infinitive or participles {to must, musting, musted do not
exist), and it has no past tense. When necessary, we express similar
meanings with other words, for example forms of have to (see 239).

It's annoying to have to get up early on Sundays, (not ... to must get
up ...) He'll have to start coming on time, (not He'll must...)

She's always had to work hard, (not She^{i}s-always musted...)

We had to cut short our holiday because my mother was ill (not
We-musted-...)

e Some ideas about the past can be expressed by must have + past
participle (see 359.4).

I can't find my keys. I must have left them at home.

Must can also be used with a past sense in indirect speech.

Everybody told me I must stop worrying.

f There is a contracted negative mustn't (/'mAsnt/). Must has two

pronunciations: a 'strong' pronunciation /mASt/ and a ‘weak'
pronunciation /m(a)sf/. The weak pronunciation is used in most cases
(see 616).

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark53>>2    meanings

Must is used mostly to express the deduction or conclusion that
something is certain (see 359), and (less often in American English) to
talk about necessity and obligation (see 360).    ».

You must be Anna's sister - you look just like her.

You really must get your hair cut.

For differences between must and have (got) to, see 361.

For the difference between must and should, see 520.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark54>>359 must (2): deduction (concluding that
something is certain)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark55>>1    statements: Mary must have a problem

Must can be used to express the deduction or conclusion that something
is certain or highly probable: it is normal or logical, there are
excellent reasons for believing it, or it is the only possible
explanation for what is happening. If A is bigger than B, and B is
bigger than C, then A must be bigger than C. Vm in love. ~ You must be
very happy.

Mary must have a problem - she keeps crying.

There^{f}s the doorbell. It must be Roger.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark56>>2    negatives: It can't be the postman

Must is not often used to express certainty in negative clauses. We
normally use cannot/can't to say that something is certainly not the
case, because it is logically or practically impossible, or extremely
improbable.

If A is bigger than B, and B is bigger than Q then C can't be bigger
than A. It can't be the postman at the door. It's only seven o'clock,
(not It mustn't be the postman ...)

She's not answering the phone. She can't be at home.

However, mustn't is used in question tags (see 487-488) after must.

It must be nice to be a cat, mustn't it? (not ... can't it?)

And must not is occasionally used, especially in American English, to
say that there is evidence that something is not the case (see 361.4)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark57>>3    need not / does not have to

Need not f needn't is used (especially in British English) to say that
something is not necessarily so; does not have to can also be used. Must
not is not used in this sense.

Look at those tracks. That must be a dog. -It needn't be - it could be a
fox. (or ... It doesn't have to be...) (not .. .-It mustn't be...)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark58>>4    That must have been nice

We can use must have + past participle to express certainty about the
past. We went to Rome last month. ~ That must have been nice.

A woman phoned while you were out. ~ It must have been Kate.

Can is used in questions and negatives.

Where can John have put the matches? He can't have thrown them away.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark59>>5    indirect speech

Must can be used after a past reporting verb as if it were a past tense.

I felt there must be something wrong.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark60>>6 must and should

Should can be used as a weaker form of must (see 520). Compare:

Ann must be at home by now. (= I think she's certainly at home.)

Ann should be at home by now. (= I think she's very probably at home.)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark61>>360 must (3): necessity and obligation

The following explanations apply particularly to British English.
Americans often use have (got) to where British people use must (see
361). However, this use of have (got) to is becoming more common in
British English under American influence.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark62>>1    statements: I really must stop smoking

In affirmative statements, we can use must to say what is necessary, and
to give strong advice and orders to ourselves or other people.

Plants must get enough light and water if they are to grow properly.

British industry must improve its productivity.

I really must stop smoking.

You must be here before eight o*clock tomorrow.

Must is common in emphatic invitations.

You really must come and see us soon.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark63>>2    questions: Must I...?

In questions, we use must to ask about what the hearer thinks is
necessary. Must I clean all the rooms?

Why must you always leave the door open?

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark64>>3    negatives: You mustn't/can't...

We use must not f mustn't to say that it is wrong to do things, or to
tell people not to do things. Can't is also possible.

The government mustn't/can't expect people to work for no money.

You mustn't/can't open this parcel until Christmas Day.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark65>>4    mustn't and needn't / don't have to

Mustn't is not used to say that things are unnecessary. This idea is
expressed by needn't, don't need to (see 366) or don't have to.

You needn't work tomorrow if you don't want to. or You don't have to
work ... (not You-musfrt^{1}*-... if you don't want to.)

You don't need to get a visa to go to Scotland or You don't have to get
a visa... (not -¥6u-mu$tn'-t-get-a-visa to go to Scotland.)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark66>>5    past necessity and obligation

Must is not normally used to talk about past obligation (except in
indirect speech - see below). This is because must is used mainly to
influence people's behaviour - for example through orders or advice -
and one cannot do this in the past. Had to is used to talk about
obligation that existed in the past.

I had to cycle three miles to school when I was a child.

My parents had to work very hard to build up their business.    ►

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark67>>6    indirect speech

Must can be used after a past reporting verb as if it were a past tense.

The doctor said that I must stop smoking.

Obligation can also be reported with had to and would have to.

The doctor said that I had to / would have to stop smoking.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark68>>7    must and should

Should can be used as a weaker form of must (see 520). Compare:

That carpet must be cleaned (= It is absolutely necessary.)

That carpet should be cleaned (= It would be a good idea.)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark69>>361 must (4): advanced points

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark70>>1    must and have to

In statements about obligation with must the obligation most often comes
from the speaker (and in questions, from the hearer). To talk about an
obligation that comes from ‘outside' (for instance a regulation, or an
order from somebody else), we usually prefer have to. Compare:

-    I must do some more work; I want to pass my exam.

In my job I have to work from nine to five, (More natural than ... I
must work from nine to five.)

-    We must go to New York soon and see your mother.

My wife's an interpreter: she often has to go to New York. (More natural
than ... she must often go to New York.)

-    I must stop smoking. (I want to.)

I've got to stop smoking. (Doctor's orders.)

-    This is a terrible party. We really must go home.

This is a lovely party, but we've got to go home because of the
baby-sitter.

-    I've got bad toothache. I must make an appointment with the dentist

I can't come to work tomorrow morning because Vve got to see the dentist

-    You really must go to church next Sunday - you haven*t been for
ages. (I am

telling you to.)

Catholics have to go to church on Sundays. (Their religion tells them
to.)

-    Must you wear dirty old jeans all the time? (Is it personally
important

for you?)

Do you have to wear a tie at work? (Is there a regulation?)

Have to can also be used to talk about obligation coming from the
speaker or hearer, in the same way as must This is normal in American
English (which uses must less often in this sense), and is becoming very
common in British English.

I really have to stop smoking, (or I really must.,.)

Do I have to clean all the rooms? (or Must /...?)

For have to and have got to, see 239.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark71>>2    future obligation: will have to. have
(got) to and must

Will have to is used to talk about future obligation (will must is
impossible -see 358); but have (got) to is preferred when arrangements
for the future have already been made. Compare:

When you leave school you^{f}U have to find a job.

Vve got to go for a job interview tomorrow.

Going to have to is also possible.

We're going to have to repair that window.

Must can be used to give orders or instructions for the future.

You can borrow my car, but you must bring it back before ten.

Will have to can be used to ‘distance' the instructions (see 436),
making them sound less like direct orders from the speaker.

You can borrow my car, but you'll have to bring it back before ten.

Will need to can be used in the same way (see 366.4).

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark72>>3    talking about the past: had to ... and
must have ...

Had to is used to talk about past obligation. Must have + past
participle is used to express certainty about the past (see 359.4).
Compare:

Edna isn't in her office. She had to go home.

(= It was necessary for her to go home.)

Edna isn't in her office. She must have gone home.

(= It seems certain that she has gone home.)

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark73>>4    a British-American difference: can't
and must not

In American English, must not is often used when something is not
logically impossible, but when there is strong evidence for believing
that it is not the case. Compare:

-    He only left the office five minutes ago. He can't be home yet.
(It's logically

impossible that he's home.)

She's not answering the doorbell She must not be at home. (It's not
logically impossible that she's home, bul it seems pretty certain that
she isn't.)

-    The restaurant can't be open - the door's locked.

That restaurant must not be any good - it's always empty.

In British English, can't is normal for both meanings (though some
people use must not for the ‘seems pretty certain' meaning). Compare:

She walked past without saying Hello\ She must not have seen you.

(AmE; some British speakers.)

She walked past without saying ^{4}Hello\ She can't have seen you.

(most British speakers.)

Note that the contracted form mustn't is rare in AmE.

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark74>>362 names: Florence, Homer etc

<<main-22.xhtml#bookmark75>>1 cities

The names of cities are often different in different languages - for
example the capital of Denmark, Kobenhavn, is called Kopenhagen in
German, Copenhague in French, and Copenhagen in Italian and English.
Some examples of English names for cities:

The Hague, Brussels, Antwerp, Hanover, Cologne, Munich, Vienna, Lyons
(now more usually Lyon), Marseilles (now more usually Marseille), Milan,
Florence, Venice, Rome, Naples, Padua, Genoa, Leghorn (now more usually
Livorno), Turin, Geneva, Seville, Lisbon, Athens, Thessalonica, Prague,
Warsaw, Belgrade, Moscow, St Petersburg, Bucharest, Beirut, Damascus,

Jerusalem, Peking (now usually Beijing), Bombay (now usually Mumbai),
Calcutta (now usually Kolkata).

<<main-23.xhtml>>

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    classical names

The same is true of many classical Greek and Roman names. Some examples:
Homer, Aeschylus, Livy, Horace, Ovid, Virgil_{t} Aesop, Aristotle,
Euclid, Sophocles, Mercury, Jupiter, Helen, Troy, Odysseus

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    artists

The Italian artists Raffaello Sanzio and Tiziano are called Raphael and
Titian in English.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark2>>4    countries

The names of countries, of course, also differ from one language to
another (e.g. Deutschland, Nemecko, Allemagne, Germany). English
versions are not listed here, as they are well known and can easily be
found in any dictionary if needed.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark3>>363 names and titles: Peter; Mr Lewis

Names and titles are used both when talking about people and when
talking to them. There are some differences.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark4>>1 talking about people

When we talk about people we can name them in four ways, a first name

We use first names mostly informally, for relatives, friends and
children. Where's Peter? He said he'd be here at three.

How's Maud getting on at school?

b first name + surname

This is neutral - neither particularly formal nor particularly informal.

Isn't that Peter Connolly the actor?

We're going on holiday with Mary and Daniel Sinclair.

c title (Mr, Mrs etc) + surname

This is more formal. We talk like this about people we do not know, or
when we want to show respect or be polite.

Can I speak to Mr Lewis, please?

We've got a new teacher called Mrs Campbell Ask Miss Andrews to come in,
please.

There's a Ms Sanders on the phone.

Note that it is less usual to talk about people by using title + first
name + surname (e.g. Mr John Parker).

d surname only

We often use just the surname to talk about men (and occasionally women)
in public life - politicians, sports personalities, writers and so on.

Do you think Roberts would make a good President?

The 5,000 metres was won by Jones I don't think Eliot is a very good
dramatist.

Thatcher was the first British woman Prime Minister.

Surnames alone are sometimes used for employees (especially male
employees), and by members of groups (especially all-male groups like
soldiers, schoolboys, team members) when they refer to each other.

Tell Patterson to come and see me at once.

Let's put Billows in goal and move Carter up.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark5>>2    talking to people

When we talk to people we generally name them in one of two ways, a
first name

This is informal, used for example to relatives, friends and children.

Hello, Pamela. How are you?

b title + surname

This is more formal or respectful.

Good morning\ Miss Williamson.

Note that we do not usually use both the first name and the surname of a
person that we are talking to. It would be unusual to say ^{4}Hello,
Peter Matthews', for example.

Members of all-male groups sometimes address each other by their
surnames alone (e.g. *Hello, Smith), but this is unusual in modem
English.

Mr, Mrs and Ms are not generally used alone.

Excuse me. Can you tell me the time? (not Excuse me, Mr or Excuse me,
Mrs.) Doctor can be used alone to talk to medical doctors whom one is
consulting, but not usually in other cases.

Doctor, I've got this pain in my elbow.

Sir and madam are used in Britain mostly by people in service
occupations (e.g. shop assistants). Some employees call their male
employers sir, and some schoolchildren call their teachers sir or miss.
Dear Sir and Dear Madam are common ways of beginning letters to
strangers (see 146) - note the capital letters. In other situations sir
and madam are unusual in British English.

Excuse me. Can you tell me the time? (not Excuse me, sir...)

In American English, sir and ma'am are less formal than in British
English, and are quite often used (especially in the South and West)
when addressing people.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark6>>3    notes on titles

Note the pronunciations of the titles Mr, Mrs and Ms (used before
names): Mr /'mist9(r)/ Mrs /'misiz/ Ms /miz/ or /maz/

Mr (= Mister) is not normally written in full, and the other two cannot
be. Like Mr, Ms does not show whether somebody is married or not. It is
often used, especially in writing, to talk about or address women when
one does not know (or has no reason to say) whether they are married.
Many women also choose to use Ms before their own names in preference to
Mrs or Miss. Ms is a relatively new title: it has been in common use in
Britain since the 1970s, and a little longer in the United States.    »

Dr (= Doctor) is used as a title for medical and other doctors (but see
paragraph 2 for its use).

Professor does not mean ‘teacher*; it is used only for heads of
university departments and some other very senior university teachers.

Note that we do not normally combine two titles such as Prof Dr or Mrs
Dr.

For ways of addressing people in letters, see 146.

For ways of introducing people, see 545.L

For full stops with abbreviated titles and initials, see 2.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark7>>364 nationalities, countries and regions

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark8>>1    introduction

In order to refer to a nation or region and its affairs it is usually
necessary to know four words:

•    the name of the country or region

Denmark, Japan, France, Catalonia

•    the adjective

Danish, Japanese, French, Catalan

•    the singular noun used for a person from the country

a Dane, a Japanese, a Frenchman/ woman, a Catalan

•    the plural expression the... used for the population as a whole

the Danes, the Japanese, the French, the Catalans Usually the singular
noun is the same as the adjective (e.g. Greek, Mexican). The plural
expression is usually the same as the adjective + -s (e.g. the Greeks,
the Mexicans); words ending in -ese, and Swiss, have no -5 (e.g. the
Japanese; the Swiss). See paragraph 2 below for more examples.

However, there are a number of exceptions. Some of these are listed in
paragraph 3.

All words of this kind (including adjectives) begin with capital
letters.

American literature (not american literature)

The name of a national language is often the same as the national
adjective. Danish is difficult to pronounce. Do you speak Japanese?

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark9>>2    Examples

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Country/region

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Adjective

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Person

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Population

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

America

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

American

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

an American

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Americans

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

(The United States)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Belgium

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Belgian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Belgian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Belgians

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Brazil

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Brazilian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Brazilian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Brazilians

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Europe

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

European

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a European

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Europeans

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Italy

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Italian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

an Italian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Italians

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Kenya

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Kenyan

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Kenyan

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Kenyans

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Morocco

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Moroccan

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Moroccan

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Moroccans

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Norway

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Norwegian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Norwegian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Norwegians

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Palestine

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Palestinian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Palestinian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Palestinians

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Russia

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Russian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Russian

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Russians

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Tyrol

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Tyrolean

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a Tyrolean

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

the Tyroleans

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

| Country/region   | Adjective    | Person         | Population       |
| Greece           | Greek        | a Greek        | the Greeks       |
| Iraq             | Iraqi        | an Iraqi       | the Iraqis       |
| Israel           | Israeli      | an Israeli     | the Israelis     |
| Thailand         | Thai         | a Thai         | the Thais        |
| China            | Chinese      | a Chinese      | the Chinese      |
| Congo            | Congolese    | a Congolese    | the Congolese    |
| Portugal         | Portuguese   | a Portuguese   | the Portuguese   |
| Switzerland      | Swiss        | a Swiss        | the Swiss        |

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark10>>3 exceptions

| Country/region     | Adjective   | Person                      | Population    |
| Britain            | British     | a British person (Briton)   | the British   |
| England            | English     | an Englishwoman/man         | the English   |
| France             | French      | a Frenchman/woman           | the French    |
| Ireland            | Irish       | an Irishwoman/man           | the Irish     |
| Spain              | Spanish     | a Spaniard                  | the Spanish   |
| The Netherlands/   | Dutch       | a Dutchwoman/man            | the Dutch     |
| Holland            |             |                             |               |
| Wales              | Welsh       | a Welshman/woman            | the Welsh     |
| Denmark            | Danish      | a Dane                      | the Danes     |
| Finland            | Finnish     | a Finn                      | the Finns     |
| Poland             | Polish      | a Pole                      | the Poles     |
| Scotland           | Scottish,   | a Scot                      | the Scots     |
|                    | Scotch      |                             |               |
| Sweden             | Swedish     | a Swede                     | the Swedes    |
| Turkey             | Turkish     | a Turk                      | the Turks     |

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark11>>Notes

a Scottish is the usual word for the people and culture of Scotland;
Scotch is used for whisky.

b The word Briton is unusual except in newspaper headlines - for example
TWO BRITONS KILLED IN air CRASH. Brit is sometimes used informally.

c English is not the same as British, and is not used for Scottish,
Welsh or Irish people (see 114).

d Although American is the normal English word for United States
citizens and affairs, people from other parts of the American continent
may object to this use, and some people avoid it for this reason.    >

e Arabic is used for the language spoken in Arab countries; in other
cases, the normal adjective is Arab. Arabian is used in a few fixed
expressions and place names (e.g. Saudi Arabian, the Arabian Sea).

f Note the pronunciation of words like Irishman/men, Dutchman/men: the
singular is the same as the plural (/'airijman, ^{l}d At Jinan/).

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark12>>365    near (to)

Near can be used as a preposition. Near to is also possible with the
same meaning, but is less common.

We live near (to) the station.

I put my bag down near (to) the door. She was near (to) despair. Near
(to) can be followed by an -ing form.

J came very near (to) hitting him.

For -ing forms after to, see 298.2.

For the difference between nearest and next, see 375.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark13>>366    need

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark14>>1    ordinary verb: Everybody needs to rest

Need most often has ordinary verb forms: the third person singular has
-s, and questions and negatives are made with do. Need is usually
followed by an infinitive with to.

Everybody needs to rest sometimes.

Do we need to reserve seats on the train?

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark15>>2    modal auxiliary forms: he needn't, need
I?

Need can also have the same present-tense forms as modal auxiliary
verbs: the third person singular has no -s, and questions and negatives
are made without do. In this case, need is normally followed by an
infinitive without to.

She needn't reserve a seat - there'll be plenty of room.

These forms are used mainly in negative sentences (needn't); but they
are also possible in questions, after if and in other ‘non-affirmative'
structures (see 381). You needn't fill in a form.    Need I fill in a
form?

J wonder if I need fill in a farm.

This is the only form you need fill in.

(but not You need fill in a form.)

These forms are more common in BrE; in AmE have to / don't have to are
preferred.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark16>>3    needn't, need /?: immediate necessity

These modal forms of need normally refer to immediate necessity. They
are often used to ask for or give permission - usually permission not to
do something. They are not used to talk about habitual, general
necessity. Compare:

It's OK - You needn't / don't need to pay for that phone call You don't
need to pay for emergency calls in most countries. (not You needn-t
pay-... in most countries.)

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark17>>4    talking about the future

Present tense forms of need are used when making decisions about the
future. Need I come in tomorrow?

Tell her she doesn't need to work tonight.

Will need to... can be used to talk about future obligation, and give
advice for the future. It can make orders and instructions sound less
direct.

We'll need to repair the roof next year.

You'll need to start work soon if you want to pass your exams.

You'll need to fill in this form before you see the Inspector.

For similar uses of have to> see 239.3.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark18>>5    need.. .ing: The sofa needs cleaning

After need an -ing form can be used with the same meaning as a passive
infinitive, especially in BrE.

That sofa needs cleaning again. (= ... needs to be cleaned ...)

A structure with object + ...ing or past participle is also possible in
some cases.

You need your head examining. (BrE) (or ... examined.)

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark19>>6    need not have ...

If we say that somebody need not have done something, we mean that he or
she did it, but that it was unnecessary - a waste of time.

You needn't have woken me up. I don't have to go to work today.

I needn't have cooked so much food. Nobody was hungry.

On the other hand, if we say that somebody did not need to do something,
we are simply saying that it was not necessary (whether or not it was
done). Compare:

I needn't have watered the flowers. Just after I finished it started
raining.

It started raining, so I didn't need to water the flowers.

Need never have... is a more emphatic version of need not have\_\_\_\_

I need never have packed all that suncream - it rained every day:

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark20>>7    need not and must not

Need not or do not need to is used to say that there is no obligation;
must not is used to say that there is an obligation not to do something.
Compare:

You needn't tell Jennifer - she already knows.

You mustn't tell Margaret -1 don't want her to know.

Need not is also sometimes used to say that something is not necessarily
true. She looks quite ill. Vm sure it's flu. ~ It needn't be - maybe
she's just over-tired.

For there is no need to..see 587.2.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark21>>367 negative structures (1): basic rules

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark22>>1    negative verb forms: auxiliary + not

We make negative verb forms by putting not after an auxiliary verb.

We have not forgotten you. It was not raining. She can't swim.

Do is normally used if there is no other auxiliary verb.

/ like the salad, hut I don't like the soup. (not / like not the-soup.)

Do is followed by the infinitive without to.

I didn't think, (not f-didn^{L}t to thirtk, I-didn'-t thinking or
h-didn'-Mhought.) Do is not used with another auxiliary verb.

You mustn't worry, (not You don't must worry.)

Do is not normally used with be (even when be is not auxiliary).

The supper isn't ready, (not Thesupper-doesr\^t-beready.)

For negative forms of have, dare, need and used, see the entries on
these verbs.

For the dialect form ain't, see 143.4.

For negatives without do in older English (e.g. / like him not), see
392.

For negative subjunctives (e.g. It's important that he not be
disturbed), see 567,2.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark23>>2    imperatives: Don't worry

Negative imperatives are made with do not / don't + infinitive (see
268).

Do not expect quick results, (not Expect not...)

Don't worry - I'll look after you. (not Worry not...)

Do not / don't is also used to make the negative imperative of be.

Don't be rude.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark24>>3    infinitives and -ing forms: It's
important not to worry

We put not before infinitives and -ing forms. Do is not used.

It's important not to worry, (not .. . to don't worry:)

The best thing about a holiday is not working.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark25>>4    other parts of a clause: not his wife,
not before six

We can put not with other parts of a clause, not only a verb.

Ask Jake, not his wife. Come early, but not before six.

It's working, but not properly.

We do not usually begin a sentence with not + subject. Instead, we use a
structure with it.

It was not George that came, but his brother, (not Not George came...)
For the difference between not and no with nouns, see 382.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark26>>5    other negative words: never, seldom etc

Other words besides not can make a clause negative. Compare:

He's not at home. He's never at home.

He's seldom / rarely / hardly ever at home.

We do not normally use the auxiliary do with these other words. Compare:
He doesn't work.

He never works, (not He-does-never work.)

He seldom / rarely / hardly ever works.

However, do can be used for emphasis or contrast.

I never did like her.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark27>>6    question tags: You don'tdo you?

After negative clauses, question tags {see 487-488) are not negative.

You don't work on Sundays, do you?

You seldom work on Saturdays, do you? {not You seldom work on Saturdays,
don't you?)

She never smiled, did she?

The same thing happens after clauses with little and few (see 329).

There's little point in doing anything about it, is there? (not ...
im\^Hhere?) He has few reasons for staying, has he?

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark28>>7    'non-affirmative' words: any etc

We do not usually use some, somebody etc in negative clauses. Instead,
we use the ‘non-affirmative' words any, anybody etc. (see 381). Compare:

Vve found some mushrooms. I haven't found any mushrooms.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark29>>368 negative structures (2): negative
questions

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark30>>1    structure

Contracted and uncontracted negative questions have different word
order. (Uncontracted negative questions are usually formal.)

auxiliary verb + n't + subject

Doesn't she understand?

Why haven't you booked your holiday yet?

auxiliary verb + subject + not

Does she not understand?

Why have you not booked your holiday yet?

Non-auxiliary have and be go in the same position as auxiliary verbs.

Hasn't she any friends to help her?    Aren't you ready?

Have they not at least a room to stay in? Is Mrs Allen not at home?

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark31>>2    two meanings

Negative questions can have two different kinds of meaning. It is
usually clear from the situation and context which kind of question is
being asked.

a 'It's true that..isn't it?'

A negative question can ask for confirmation of a positive belief. In
this case the question expects the answer Yes, and means ‘It's true
that..., isn't it?' Didn't you go and see Helen yesterday? How is she?

(= I believe you went and saw Helen yesterday ...)

Expressions of opinion can be made less definite by expressing them as
negative questions (so that they ask for agreement).

Wouldn't it be better to switch the lights on?

Negative questions of this kind are common in exclamations (see 195) and
rhetorical questions (see 482).

Isn't it a lovely dayf

She's growing up to be a lovely person. ~ Yes, isn't she!

Isn't the answer obvious? (= Of course the answer is obvious.)    »>

b 'Is it true that... not...?'

A negative question can also ask for confirmation of a negative belief.
In this case the question expects the answer No, and means ‘Is it true
that... not.. .?* Don't you feel well? (= Am I right in thinking you
don't feel well?)

Oh, dear. Can't they come this evening?

This kind of negative question can show that the speaker is surprised
that something has not happened or is not happening.

Hasn't the postman come yet?

Didn't the alarm go off? I wonder what's wrong with it

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark32>>3    polite requests, invitations, offers,
complaints and criticisms

Pressing invitations and offers often begin Won't you...? Wouldn't you
...? or Why don't you ...?

Won't you come in for a few minutes?

Wouldn't you like something to drink?

Why don't you come and spend the weekend with us?

But in other cases we do not usually use negative questions to ask
people to do things. This is done with ordinary questions, or with
negative statement + question tag.

Excuse me, can you help me for a moment? (ordinary question, used as a
request)

You can't help me for a moment, can you? (negative statement + question
tag, common in informal requests) but not Can't you help me for a
moment?

Negative questions may be understood as complaints or criticisms.

Can't you lend me your pen for a minute? (= something like ‘Are you too
selfish to lend me ...?')

Don^{p}t you ever listen to what I say?

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark33>>4    yes and no

In a reply to a negative question, Yes suggests an affirmative verb, and
No suggests a negative verb. Compare:

-    Haven't you written to Mary? ~ Yes. (= 1 have written to her.)

Haven't you told her about us? *No. (= 1 haven't told her about us.)

-    Didn't the postman come this morning? ~ Yes, he did Didn't he bring
anything for me? ---No, he didn't

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark34>>369 negative structures (3): think, hope,
seem etc

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark35>>1 I don't think...

When we introduce negative ideas with think, believe, suppose, imagine
and words with similar meanings, we usually make the first verb (think
etc) negative, not the second.

I don't think you've met my wife.

(More natural than I think you haven't met my wife.)

I don't believe she's at home.

(More natural than I believe she isn't at home.)

However, surprise is often expressed with I thought + negative.

Would you like a drink? ~ I thought you'd never ask.

Hello! I thought you weren't coming.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark36>>2    I hope that... not...

This does not happen with hope.

I hope it doesn't rain. (not I don't hope it rains.)

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark37>>3    short answers: I suppose not.

In short answers, most of these verbs can be followed by not (see 539).

Are we going to see Alan again? ~I believe/suppose/hope not.

Another possible short answer construction is I don't... so (see 539).

Do you think it'll snow? don't believefsupposefthink so.

Hope is not used in this structure.

I hope not (not bdorit-hope-so.)

I don't think so is more common than I think not which is rather formal.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark38>>4    verbs followed by infinitives

Many verbs can be followed by infinitives (see 282). In an informal
style we often prefer to make the first verb negative rather than the
infinitive, although this may not change the meaning at all. This
happens, for example, with appear, seem, expect_{t} happen, intend and
want Sibyl doesn't seem to like you.

(Less formal than Sibyl seems not to like you.)

I don't expect to see you before Monday.

(More natural than I expect not to see you ...)

Angela and I were at the same university, but we never happened to meet
(Less formal than ...we happened never to meet.)

I don't want to fail this exam. (not / want not to fail...)

After I've finished this contract I never intend to teach again.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark39>>370 negative structures (4): double
negatives

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark40>>1    English and other languages

In some languages, a negative word like nobody, nothing or never has to
be used with a negative verb. In standard English, nobody, nothing,
never etc are themselves enough to give a negative meaning, and not is
unnecessary.

I opened the door> but I could see nobody, (not I couldn't-see nobody.)

Tell them nothing, (not Don't telHhem nothing.)

Your suggestion will help neither of us. (not ... won't help
neitker-...) Nothing matters now - everything's finished, (not Nothing
doesn't matter...)

I've never understood what she wants, (not I-haven't never
understood...)

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark41>>2    nobody and not anybody, etc

Nobody, nothing_{t} never etc are rather emphatic. We often prefer to
use not anybody, not anything, not ever etc. Note that anybody,
anything_{t} ever etc are not themselves negative words (see 381) - they
have to be used with not to give a negative meaning.    ►

/ opened the door, but I couldn't see anybody: (not ... but I cotdd-see
anybody.)

Don't tell them anything.

Your suggestion won't help either of us.

At the beginning of a clause, only nobody, nothing etc are used.

Nothing matters, (not Not anything matters.)

Nowhere is safe.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark42>>3    double and multiple negatives and their
meaning

Two or more negative words can be used in one clause, but then both
words normally have their full meaning. Compare:

Say nothing. (= Be silent.)

Don't just say nothing. Tell us what the problem is. (= Don't be
silent...) Multiple negatives are sometimes used instead of simple
positive structures for special stylistic effects. This is rather
literary; in spoken English it can seem unnatural or old-fashioned.

Not a day passes when I don't regret not having studied music in my
youth. (More natural: Every day I regret not having studied music when I
was younger, or / wish I had studied music when I was younger.)

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark43>>4    dialects

In many British, American and other dialects, two or more negatives can
be used with a single negative meaning.

I ain't seen nobody. (Standard English: I haven't seen anybody.)

I ain't never done nothing to nobody, and I ain't never got nothing from
nobody no time. (American song by Bert Williams)

For more information about ain't, see 143.4.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark44>>5    two negative ideas: not... or I not...
nor

When not refers to two or more verbs, nouns, adjectives etc, we usually
join them with or.

He doesn't smoke or drink, (not He doesn't smoke nor drink.)

She wasn't angry or upset.

It's not on the table or in the cupboard.

However, we can use nor after a pause, to separate and emphasise a
second verb, adjective etc.

Our main need is not food, nor money. It is education. (More emphatic
than ... food or money.)

She didn't phone that day, nor the next day. (More emphatic than ... or
the next day.)

Note that neither cannot be used in this way.

For the use of neither... nor to join two negative ideas (e.g. He
neither smokes nor drinks), see 373.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark45>>6    ... / don't think etc

In informal speech, expressions like I don't think or I don't suppose
are often added after negative statements. In this case, the extra
negative makes no difference to the meaning of the statement.

She hasn't got much chance of passing the exam, I don't think.

We won't be back before midnight, I don't suppose.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark46>>7 extra negative in expressions of doubt

In informal standard spoken English, a negative verb (without a negative
meaning) is sometimes used after expressions of doubt or uncertainty.

I shouldn't be surprised if they didn't get married soon. (= ... if they
got married soon.)

I wonder whether I oughtn't to go and see a doctor - I'm feeling a bit
funny. (= ... whether I ought to ...)

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark47>>371    negative structures (5): ambiguous
sentences

In a negative structure, not can refer to different parts of a sentence.
Compare: Arthur didn't write to Sue yesterday - he phoned her Arthur
didn't write to Sue yesterday - he wrote to Ann.

Arthur didn't write to Sue yesterday - he wrote this morning.

The exact meaning is shown in speech by stress and intonation, and even
in writing it is usually clear from the context and situation. However,
confusions sometimes arise. They can usually be avoided by reorganising
the sentence. Compare:

The car crash didn't kill him. (Did he live, or did something else kill
him?) It wasn't the car crash that killed him. (Only one possible
meaning.) Negative sentences with because-clauses are often ambiguous.

I didn't sing because Pam was there.

This sentence could mean ‘My reason for not singing was that Pam was
there' or ‘My reason for singing was not that Pam was there'. The first
meaning could be shown clearly by putting the because-clause at the
beginning.

Because Pam was there, I didn't sing.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark48>>372    neither (of): determiner

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark49>>1    neither + singular noun

We use neither before a singular noun to mean 'not one and not the other
(of two)^{1}.

Can you come on Monday or Tuesday? ~l'm afraid neither day is possible:

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark50>>2    neither of + plural

We use neither of before a determiner (for example the_{f} my, these),
and before a pronoun. The noun or pronoun is plural.

Neither of my brothers can sing, (not Neither my brothers can sing.)
Neither of us saw it happen.

After neither o/+ noun/pronoun, we use a singular verb in a formal
style.

Neither of my sisters is married In an informal style, a plural verb is
possible.

Neither of my sisters are married.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark51>>3    neither used alone

We can use neither without a noun or pronoun, if the meaning is clear. ►

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark52>>4 pronunciation

In British English, neither can be pronounced both /'nai(te(r)/ and
/'ni:d9(r)/. In American English, the usual pronunciation is /'niifor/.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark53>>373    neither ... nor

This structure is used to join two negative ideas. (It is the opposite
of both ... and.) It is usually rather formal.

I neither smoke nor drink, (less formal: I don't smoke or drink.)

The film was neither well made nor well acted.

Sometimes more than two ideas are connected by neither... non He neither
smiled spoke, nor looked at me.

Neither cannot begin a complete clause in this structure.

He neither smiled... nor... (but not Neither he smiled...)

When singular subjects are connected by neither... non the verb is
normally singular, but it can be plural in a less formal style.

Neither James nor Virginia was at home. (normal)

Neither James nor Virginia were at home, (less formal)

See also both ... and (111) and either... or (175).

For not... or and not... nor, see 370.5.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark54>>374    neither, nor and not... either

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark55>>1    neither and nor

We can use neither and nor as adverbs to mean ‘also not'. Neither and
nor come at the beginning of a clause, and are followed by inverted word
order (see 302-303): auxiliary verb + subject.

I can't swim. \^Neither/nor can J. (not / also can't.)

Ruth didn't turn up, and neither!nor did Kate, (not .. . and Kate didrit
too.) In American English, nor is not normally used after and.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark56>>2    not either

We can also use not... either with the same meaning and normal word
order. I can't swim. ~ I can't either.

Ruth didn't turn up, and Kate didn't either.

In very informal speech, me neither (and occasionally me either,
especially in AmE) can be used instead of I ...n't either.

I can't swim. ~Me neither.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark57>>3    one negative

Only one negative word (not or neither) is necessary to give a negative
meaning.

Neither did Kate oh Kate didn't either, (not Neither didn't Kate or Kate

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

For the pronunciation of neither, see 372. For neither... nor, see 373.

For other uses of either* see 174-175.    For not... or and not... nor\
see 370-375.

For so am I, so do i etc, see 541.

For the difference between toolalso and either in negative sentences,
see 47.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark58>>375 next and the next; nearest

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark59>>1 next week, month etc; the next week, month
etc

Next week, month etc (without the) is the week, month etc just after
this one. If I am speaking in July, next month is August; in 2006, next
year is 2007.

The next week, month etc is the period of seven/thirty/etc days starting
at the moment of speaking. On July 15th 2006, the next month is the
period from July 15th to August 15th; the next year is the period from
July 2006 to July 2007. Compare:

-    Goodbye - see you next week, (not ... see you the next week) fll be
busy for the next week. (= the seven days starting today)

-    Next year will be difficult. (= the year starting next January)

The next year will be difficult. (= the twelve months starting now)

The difference between last and the last is similar. See 314.

next week

\_A\_

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

r

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

“>v

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

NOW Thurs Fii Sat Sum Mon Tu Wed Thuis Pri Sat Sun FUTURE

the next week

r

NOW Thurs Fii Sat Sun Mon Tu Wed Thurs Fri Sai Sum FUTURE

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark60>>2    the next three ... etc

Note the word order in expressions with numbers.

fll be at college for the next three years. (not .. .the
threenext-years:)

We generally say the next few days, not the next-days.

The next few days will be wet.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark61>>3    next Sunday etc

When next is used with the names of days or months, it is not always
clear exactly what is meant.

See you next Sunday. ~Do you mean this coming Sunday or the one after?
To avoid misunderstanding, one can say for example (1) on Sunday, this
Sunday, the I this Sunday coming, the! this coming Sunday or (on) Sunday
this week, and (2) on Sunday week, a week on Sunday or (on) Sunday next
week.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark62>>4    place: next and nearest

The nearest is generally preferred for place - it means ‘most near in
space*. Excuse me. Where's the nearest tube station? (not ... the next
tubestation. If you want to find Alan, just look in the nearest pub.

The next can be used for place if we are talking about movement or
direction. It means 'after this/that one'.

We get off at the next station. (= the station that we will come to
next.)

It's not on this shelf it's on the next shelf up.    ►

Next can also be used to talk about the nearest position in a row.

My girlfriend lives next door. Who works in the next office?

The people at the next table were having a terrible argument.

Next to means ‘beside'.

Come and sit next to me.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark63>>376 no, none and not a/any

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark64>>1    no: emphatic

No can be used instead of not a or not any when we want to emphasise a
negative idea.

Would you believe it? There's no wardrobe in the bedroom!

(More emphatic than ... There isn't a wardrobe ...)

Sorry I can't stop. I've got no time.

(More emphatic than ... J haven't got any time.)

There were no letters for you this morning I'm afraid.

(More emphatic than There weren't any letters ...)

After no, countable nouns are usually plural unless the sense makes a
singular noun necessary. Compare:

He's got no children. (More natural than He's got no child.)

He's got no wife. (More normal than He's got no wives.)

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark65>>2    none of

Before a determiner (e.g. the, my, this) or a pronoun, we use none of
She's done none of the work. (not .. -no of-the-work-)

We understood none of his arguments.

I've been to none of those places. None of us speaks French.

When we use none of with a plural noun or pronoun, the verb can be
singular (a little more formal) or plural (a little more informal).

None of my friends is interested, (more formal)

None of my friends are interested (more informal)

We can use none alone if the meaning is clear.

How many of the books have you read? ~None.

<<main-23.xhtml#bookmark66>>3    not a!any

We prefer not a!any in objects and complements when the sense is not
emphatic. Compare:

He's no fool (= He's not a fool at all. - emphatic negative)

A whale is not a fish, (not A-whale-is-no-fish) - the sense is not
emphatic.

<<main-24.xhtml>>

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark0>>4    subjects

Not any cannot normally be used with subjects. No and none of are used
instead.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark1>>No brand of cigarette is completely harmless.
(not Not any brand...)

No tourists ever came to our village, (not Not~any-touri$t$...)

None of my friends lives near me. (not Not any of my friends...)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark2>>5    not used to talk about two

We use neither, not no or none, to talk about two people or things (see
372). Neither of my parents could be there, (not None of my parents ...)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark3>>6 nobody etc

Nobody, nothing, no one and nowhere are used in similar ways to no.

I saw nobody. (More emphatic than I didn't see anybodyj Nobody spoke,
(not Not anybody spoke.)

For no and not, see 382.    For more about any, see 55.

For none and no one, see 380. For no as a modifying adverb (e.g. no
better), see 57.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark4>>377    no doubt

No doubt means ‘probably^{1} or 'I suppose', not 'certainly'.

No doubt it'll rain soon.

You're tired, no doubt. I'll make you a cup of tea.

To say that something is certain, we can use there is no doubt that
(formal), without any doubt (formal), certainly_{t} definitely.

There is no doubt that the world is getting warmer, (not No-dottbtthe
world is getting warmer.)

Cycling is certainly healthier than driving, (not No doubt cycling
is-keahhier than driving.)

Doubtless is similar to no doubt (but more formal); undoubtedly is
similar to there is no doubt that.

For structures with the verb doubt, see 163.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark5>>378    no matter

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark6>>1    conjunction

No matter can be used with who, whose, what, which, where, when and how.
These expressions are conjunctions, used to join clauses together. The
meaning is similar to ‘it is not important who/what etc*.

I'll love you no matter what you do.

No matter where you go, I'll follow you.

We use a present tense with a future meaning after no matter (see 580).

No matter where you go, you'll find Coca-Cola.

You'll be welcome no matter when you come.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark7>>2    no matter who etc and whoever etc

The conjunctions no matter wholwhat etc are used rather like whoever,
whatever etc (see 625). Compare:

-    No matter what you say, I won't believe you.

Whatever you say; I won't believe you.

-    Phone me when you arrive, no matter how late it is.

Phone me when you arrive, however late it is.

However, clauses with whoever! whatever/ whichever can be used as
subjects or objects. Clauses with no matter who etc cannot be used in
this way.

Whatever you do is fine with me. (but not No-matter what you do is fine
with me.)

You can have whichever you like, (but not You can have no matter which
you■ like.)    ►

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark8>>3    no matter and it doesn't matter

Because no matter... is a conjunction, it must be used with two clauses.

No matter when you come, you'll be welcome, (but not No matter
whert-yoti

vurnc.}

To introduce just one clause, we can use It doesn't matter.

It doesn't matter when you come.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark9>>4    use without a verb

However, no matter what can be used at the end of a clause, without a
following verb.

I'll always love you, no matter what. (= ... no matter what happens.)

For sentences like Something's the matter with my foot, see 585.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark10>>379    no more, not any more, no longer, not
any longer

We use no more with nouns to talk about quantity or degree - to say how
much.

There's no more bread.

We do not use no more in standard modern English as an adverb to express
the idea of actions and situations stopping. Instead, we use no longer
(usually before the verb), not... any longer or not... any more.

I no longer support the Conservative party, (not I no more support...)
This can't go on any longer. I'm not helping you any more.

Anymore may be written as one word, especially in American English.

Annie doesn't live here anymore.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark11>>380    no one and none

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark12>>1    no one

No one (also written no-one in British English) means the same as
nobody.

It cannot be followed by of.

No one wished me a happy birthday, (not No one of my friends ...)

I stayed in all evening waiting, but no one came.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    none

To express the idea 'not a single one (of)', we can use none (of)_{t}
not any (of) or not one (of) (more emphatic). No one is not used in this
way.

None of my friends wished me a happy birthday:

I haven't read any of his books.

Not one of my shirts is clean. (not No one of my skirts...)

Have you found any blackberries? ~ Not one

For more about none, see 376.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark14>>381    non-affirmative (or 'non-assertive')
words

There are some words that are not often used in affirmative sentences -
for example any, anybody, ever, yet When we affirm or assert (that is,
when we say that something is true) we normally use other words - for
example some, somebody, once, sometimes, already. Compare:

-    Somebody telephoned.    - I sometimes go to the theatre.

Did anybody telephone?    Do you ever go to the theatre?

-    Vve bought you something:    - I met the Prime Minister once.

I haven't bought you anything.    Have you ever met the Prime

~ She's already here.    Minister?

Is she here yet?

Non-affirmative words are common not only in questions and negative
sentences, but in other cases where we are not making affirmative
statements

-    for example in (/"-clauses, after comparisons, and together with
adverbs, verbs, prepositions, adjectives and determiners that have a
negative kind of meaning.

Let me know if you have any trouble.

I wonder if she found anything.

She writes better than anybody I know.

He seldom says anything

I've hardly been anywhere since Christmas

He denied that he had ever seen her.

Please forget that I ever told you anything about it I'd rather do it
without anybody's help.

It's difficult to understand anything he says.

Few people have ever seen her laugh.

For information about particular non-affirmative words, check in the
Index to find the entries for the words in question.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark15>>382    not and no

To make a word, expression or clause negative, we use not Not
surprisingly, we missed the train, (not Ne-surprisingly-...)

The students went on strike, but not the teachers. (not ... but no the
teachers.)

I can see you tomorrow, but not on Thursday.

I have not received his answer.

We can use no with a noun or -mg form to mean ‘not any', or ‘not a/an'.

No teachers went on strike. {- There weren't any teachers on strike.)

I've got no Thursdays free this term. (= I haven't got any Thursdays
...)

I telephoned, but there was no answer. {= There wasn't an answer.)

NO SMOKING

Sometimes sentences constructed with verb + not and no + noun have
similar meanings. The structure with no is usually more emphatic.

There wasn't an answer. / There was no answer.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark16>>383    not only

In the rather formal structure not only... but also, not only and but
also can go immediately before the words or expressions that they
modify.

We go there not only in winter, but also in summer.

Not only the bathroom was flooded, but also the rest of the house.

The place was not only cold, but also damp.

Mid-position with the verb (see 24) is also possible. In this case, not
only is generally used without do.

She not only sings like an angel, but also dances divinely She not only
plays the piano, but also the violin Not only can be moved to the
beginning of a clause for emphasis. It is then followed by auxiliary
verb + subject; do is used if there is no other auxiliary (for more
about this word order, see 302). But can be left out in this case. Not
only has she been late three times; she has also done no work.

Not only do they need clothing, but they are also short of water.

In informal English not only... but also is not very common; other
structures are generally preferred.

We don't only go there in winter. We go in summer too.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark17>>384    noun + complement: what can follow a
noun?

Many nouns, especially abstract nouns, can be followed by ‘complements'
-other words and expressions that 'complete* their meaning. These
complements can be prepositional phrases, infinitive expressions or
clauses (with or without prepositions).

Alan's criticism of the plan made him very unpopular.

I hate the thought of leaving you.

Does she understand the need to keep everything secret?

I admire your belief that you are always right

There's still the question of whether we're going to pay her.

Many nouns can be followed by more than one kind of complement He didn't
give any reason for the changes.

You've no reason to get angry.

The main reason why I don't believe her is this.

Not all nouns can be followed by all kinds of complement.

- the idea of marriage    - freedom to choose

the idea that I might get married freedom of choice (but not the idea to
get married) (but not freedom-of choosing)

Note that a related noun and verb may have different kinds of
complement.

I have no intention of resigning.

I do not intend to resign.

Unfortunately there is no easy way to decide which structures are
possible after a particular noun. It is best to check in a good
dictionary.

For more information about -ing forms after nouns, see 297.

For infinitives after nouns, see 285.

For should in clauses after nouns, see 521.

For subjunctives in clauses after nouns, see 567.

For the prepositions that are used after some common nouns, see 449.

For prepositions before clauses, see 453.

For structures with preparatory it (e.g. It's a pity that we can't see
him), see 446-447.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark18>>385 noun + noun (1): basic information

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark19>>1    milk chocolate', chocolate milk

Many common ideas in English are expressed by noun + noun compounds. In
this structure, the first noun modifies or describes the second, a
little like an adjective. Compare:

-    milk chocolate (a kind of chocolate) chocolate milk (a kind of
milk)

-    a horse race (a kind of race) a race horse (a kind of horse)

-    a book case (a kind of case) mineral water (a kind of water)

Noun + noun expressions can often be changed into structures where the
second noun becomes a subject and the first an object. an oil well (= a
well that produces oil) a sheepdog (= a dog that looks after sheep) a
Birmingham man (= a man who comes from Birmingham) the airport bus (=
the bus that goes to the airport)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark20>>2    the first noun is singular

Note that the first noun is usually singular in form, even if it has a
plural meaning. (For exceptions, see 531.) a shoe shop (= a shop that
sells shoes)

a horse race (= a race for horses) trouser pockets (= pockets in
trousers) a toothbrush (= a brush for teeth) a ticket office (= an
office that sells tickets)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark21>>3    articles

Articles belonging to the first (modifying) noun are dropped in noun +
noun combinations.

army officers (= officers in the army) a sun hat (= a hat that protects
you against the sun)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark22>>4    more than two nouns

More than two nouns can be put together. A group of two nouns can modify
a third noun, these can modify a fourth, and so on.

oil production costs road accident research centre This kind of
structure is very common in newspaper headlines (see 240) because it
saves space.

FURNITURE FACTORY PA Y CUT ROW

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark23>>5    other structures

Not all compound ideas can be expressed by a noun + noun structure.
Sometimes it is necessary to use a structure with of or another
preposition; sometimes a structure with possessive's is used.

a feeling of disappointment (not a disappointment feeling) letters from
home (not home letters) cow's milk (not cow milk)

For more details, see 386.    »

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark24>>6    pronunciation

Most noun + noun combinations have the main stress on the first noun.

a 'bicycle factory a 'fruit drink 'ski boots 'coffee beans However,
there are quite a number of exceptions.

a garden 'chair a fruit'pie The difference between noun modifiers and
adjectival modifiers is sometimes shown by stress. Compare:

a ^{1}French teacher (noun modifier: a person who teaches French) a
French ' teacher (adjective modifier: a teacher who is French)

To be sure of the stress on a particular combination, it is necessary to
check in a good dictionary.

For the stressing of road and street names, see 502.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark25>>7    spelling

Some short, common noun + noun combinations are generally written
together like single words.

bathroom lampshade seaside (but not railwaystation)

Others may be written with a hyphen (e.g. letter-box) or separately
(e.g. furniture shop). In many cases usage varies, and some combinations
can be found written in all three ways (e.g. bookshop, book-shop or book
shop). Hyphens are becoming less common in modem English, and (except
with very common short combinations like bathroom) it is usually
acceptable to write the two words separately.

For more information about the spelling of different kinds of compounds,
see 559.

For information about the spelling of particular noun + noun
expressions, see a good dictionary.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark26>>386 noun + noun (2): advanced points

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark27>>1 classifying expressions: a sheepdog

The noun + noun structure is mostly used to make ‘classifying*
expressions, which name a particular kind of thing.

mountain plants (a special group of plants) mineral water (a sort of
water) a sheepdog (a particular kind of dog)

We use noun + noun especially to talk about things that belong to common
well-known classes (so that the two nouns really describe a single
idea). In other cases we prefer a preposition structure. Compare:

the postman, the milkman, the insurance man (all well-known kinds of
people who may call regularly at a British home) a man from the health
department (not a regular kind of visitor)

More examples:

-    He was reading a history book, (a common class of book)

He was reading a book about the moon, (not a moon book)

-    She was sitting at a corner table in the restaurant. (Restaurants
often have comer tables.)

Who's the girl in the corner? (not Who's -the comer-gtrl?)

- What does that road sign say?

She was showing signs of tiredness, (not .. .-tiredness signs:)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    containers: a matchbox; a box of
matches

Noun + noun is used for particular kinds of container.

a matchbox a paint tin a coffee cup But we use the preposition structure
(with of) to talk about a container together with its contents.

a box of matches a tin of paint a cup of coffee

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark29>>3    units, selections and collections:
piece, group etc

We also prefer the ©/-structure with words that refer to units,
selections and collections, like piece, slice_{t} lump (of sugar), bunch
(of flowers), blade (of grass), pack (of cards), herd, flock, group and
so on. a piece of paper (not a-papter-piece) a bunch of flowers (not a
flower bunch)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark30>>4    'made of: a silk dress; silken skin

Noun + noun is normally used to say what things are made of.

a silk dress a stone bridge an iron rod a gold ring In older English,
the o/-structure was more common in this case (e.g. a dress of silk, a
bridge of stone), and it is still used in some metaphorical expressions.
He rules his family with a rod of iron.

The flowers were like a carpet of gold.

A few pairs of nouns and adjectives (e.g. gold, golden) are used as
modifiers with different meanings. Generally the noun simply names the
material something is made of, while the adjective has a more
metaphorical meaning. Compare:

a gold watch golden memories silk stockings silken skin

a lead pipe a leaden sky (grey and depressing) a stone roof a stony
silence But wooden and woollen just mean ‘made of wood/wool'.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark31>>5    measurement: a five-litre can

Noun + noun is used in measurements, with a number before the first
noun. The number is usually joined to the first noun by a hyphen (-).
Note that the first noun is normally singular in form in these cases.

a five-litre can a ten-pound note (not a five-litres can, a ten-pounds
note) a six-pound chicken a three-mile walk a five-day course a
two-person tent ten two-hour lessons The number one is often left out.

a (one-)pint mug In fractions, the plural -s is not usually dropped.

a two-thirds share (not a two-third-skare)

Exception: three quarters (a three-quarter length coat)    ►

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark32>>6    noun + 's + noun: children's clothes; a
bird's nest

In some classifying expressions we use a structure with possessive's.

This is common when we are talking about things that are used by a
person or animal: the first noun refers to the user. children's clothes
a man's sweater women's magazines a bird's nest Generally, either both
nouns are singular or both are plural.

a child's toy children's clothes but

a women's magazine Not all ‘used by* expressions have possessive's.

baby clothes a birdcage British and American usage sometimes differ.
Compare: a baby's bottle (BrE) a baby bottle (AmE) a baby's pram (BrE) a
baby carriage (AmE) a doll's house (BrE) a doll house (AmE)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark33>>7    noun + 's + noun: cow's milk; a hen's
egg

The's structure is often used for products from living animals. cow's
milk lamb's wool sheep's wool a bird's egg a hen's egg (BUT camel hair,
horsehair)

When the animal is killed to provide something, we usually use noun +
noun. calfskin    chamois leather fox fur

chicken soup a lamb chop tortoise shell

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark34>>8    parts: a man's leg; a table leg

We use the ^{f}s structure to talk about parts of people's and animals'
bodies.

a man's leg an elephant's trunk a sheep's heart But to talk about parts
of non-living things, we usually use the noun + noun structure.

a table leg (not a table's leg) a car door (not usually a car's door)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark35>>9    pronunciation

Classifying expressions with possessive's most often have the main
stress on the first noun. Compare:

-    a ^{1}doll's house (a kind of house)

my brother's ‘house (not a kind of house)

-    ^{1}goat's milk (a kind of milk)

the goat's ‘tail (not a kind of tail)

Here, too, there are exceptions. a child's 'bicycle (a kind of bicycle)

For the use of structures with '$ to talk about possession,
relationships etc, see 440.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark36>>10 noun + noun, noun + 's + noun, or
preposition structure?

This is a very complicated area of English grammar. The ‘rules* given
above show the general patterns, but unfortunately there is no easy way
to be quite

sure which structure is used to express a particular compound idea. The
most common expressions will be leamt by experience; in cases of doubt,
a good dictionary will often show which form is correct.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark37>>387    now (that)

Now (that) can be used as a conjunction. In an informal style, that is
often dropped (see 584).

Now (that) Andrew is married, he has become much more responsible. Now
the exams are over I can enjoy myself.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark38>>388    nowadays

Nowadays is an adverb meaning ‘these days', ‘at the present time'.

People seem to be very depressed nowadays.

Nowadays we think nothing of space travel Nowadays cannot be used as an
adjective.

I don't like modern fashions, (not I-don- t- like the nowadays
fashions.)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark39>>389    numbers

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark40>>1    fractions and decimals: two fifths;
nought point four

We say simple fractions like this:

% alone quarter    ^{11} he eleven sixteenths

% anlone eighth    3% three and three quarters

% three sevenths    6% six and one eighth

% two fifths

More complex fractions can be expressed by using the word over.

^{317}/so9 three hundred and seventeen over five hundred and nine

We write and say decimals like this:

0.4 nought point four (not nought comma four)

0.375 nought point three seven five (not nought point three hundred and
seventy-five)

4.7 four point seven

For the difference between a(n) and one with numbers, see paragraph 11
below.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark41>>2    before nouns

With fractions below J, we use of before nouns. three quarters of an
hour seven tenths of a mile a third of the students Half is not always
followed by of {see 231).

half an hour half (of) the students    *

O/is also possible with decimals below L nought point six of a mile

0.1625 cm nought point one six two five of a centimetre However,
decimals below 1 are often followed directly by plural nouns. nought
point six miles (not nougkt point-six mile) nought point one three two
five centimetres Fractions and decimals over 1 are normally followed by
plural nouns. one and a half hours (not one and a half hour) three and
three eighths miles 1.3 millimetres (not 1.3 millimetre)

Note also the structure a ... and a half Vve been waiting for an hour
and a half

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark42>>3    singular or plural verbs

Singular verbs are normally used after fractions, decimals, and other
expressions referring to amounts and measurements (for more details, see
527).

Three quarters of a ton is too much, (not Three quarters of a ton are..
0 3.6 kilometres is about 2 miles.

But plural verbs are used when we are talking about numbers of people or
things, even after a singular fraction.

A third of the students are from abroad (not A third of the
students-is-...) Half of the glasses are broken.

After expressions like one in three, one out of five + plural noun, both
singular and plural verbs are possible.

One in three new cars break/breaks down in the first year.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark43>>4    nought, zero, nil etc

The figure 0 is usually called nought in British English and zero in
American English. When we say numbers one figure at a time, 0 is often
called oh (like the letter O).

My account number is four one three oh six.

In measurements of temperature, 0 is called zero in both British and
American English. Zero is followed by a plural noun.

Zero degrees Celsius is thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit.

Zero scores in team games are called nil (American zero or nothing). In
tennis and similar games, the word love is used (originally from French
Voeuf meaning ‘the egg* - the figure 0 is egg-shaped).

And the score at half-time is: Scotland three, England nil Forty-love;
Andrews to serve.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark44>>5    telephone numbers

We say each figure separately, pausing after groups of three or four
(not two). When the same figure comes twice, British people usually say
double.

307 4922 three oh seven, four nine double two

(AmE three zero seven, four nine two two)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark45>>6 Roman numbers

Roman numbers (I, II, III, /Vetc) are not common in modem English, but
they are still used in a few cases - for example the names of kings and
queens, page numbers in the introductions to some books, the numbers of
paragraphs in some documents, the numbers of questions in some
examinations, the figures on some old clock faces, and occasionally the
names of centuries.

It was built in the time of Henry V For details, see Introduction page
ix.

Do question (vi) or question (vii), but not both. a fine XVIII Century
English walnut chest of drawers The Roman numbers normally used are as
follows:

| 1   | I i         | 10 X x         | 40     | XL x I    |
| 2   | II ii       | 11 XI xi       | 45     | XLV xlv   |
| 3   | III iii     | 12 XII x ii    | 50     | L I       |
| 4   | IV iv       | 13 XIII xiii   | 60     | IX Ix     |
| 5   | V v         | 14 XIV xiv     | 90     | XC xc     |
| 6   | VI vi       | 19 XIX xix     | 100    | C c       |
| 7   | VII vii     | 20 XX xx       | 500    | D         |
| 8   | VIII viii   | 21 XXI xxi     | 1000   | M         |
| 9   | IX ix       | 30 XXX xxx     | 1995   | MCMXCV    |

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark46>>7    cardinal and ordinal numbers: books,
chapters etc; kings and queens

After a noun we usually use a cardinal number (one, two etc) instead of
an ordinal number (first, second etc). This structure is common in
titles. Compare: the fourth book - Book Four the third act - Act Three
Mozart's thirty-ninth symphony - Symphony No. 39, by Mozart the third
day of the course - Timetable for Day Three However, the names of kings
and queens are said with ordinal numbers. Henry VIII: Henry the Eighth
(not Henry -Eight)

Louis XIV: Louis the Fourteenth Elizabeth II: Elizabeth the Second

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark47>>8    centuries

Note how the names of centuries relate to the years in them. The period
from 1701 - 1800 is called the 18th century (not the 17th); 1801 - 1900
is the 19th century, etc.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark48>>9    floors

The ground floor of a British house is the first floor of an American
house; the British first floor is the American second floor, etc.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark49>>10 and; punctuation

In British English we always put and between hundred! thousand! million
and numbers below a hundred. In American English, and can be dropped.

310 three hundred and ten (AmE also three hundred ten)

5,642 five thousand, six hundred and forty-two

2,025 tivo thousand and twenty-five    ►

In measurements containing two different units, and is possible before
the smaller, but is usually left out. two hours (and) ten minutes two
metres (and) thirty centimetres In writing we generally use commas (,)
to divide large numbers into groups of three figures, by separating off
the thousands and the millions. Full stops (.) are not used in this way.

3,127 (not Bt&T)    5,466,243

We do not always use commas in four-figure numbers, and they are not
used in dates.

4,126 or 4126    the year 1648

Spaces are also possible.

There are 1 000 millimetres in a metre.

Note the hyphen between the tens and units in twenty-one, twenty-two,
thirty-six, forty-nine etc.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark50>>11    a and one

We can say an eighth or one eighth, a hundred or one hundred, a thousand
or one thousand, a million or one million, etc. One is more formal.

I want to live for a hundred years, (not ... for hundred years)

Pay Mr J Baron one thousand pounds, (on a cheque)

A can only be used at the beginning of a number. Compare: alone hundred

three thousand one hundred (not three thousand a hundred)

A thousand can be used alone, and before and, but not usually before a
number of hundreds. Compare:

alone thousand    a/one thousand and forty-nine

one thousand, six hundred and two

(More natural than a thousand, six hundred and two.)

We can use a or one with measurement words. The rules are similar. alone
kilometre (BUT one kilometre, six hundred metres) anlone hour and
seventeen minutes (BUT one hour, seventeen minutes) alone pound (BUT one
pound twenty-five)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark51>>12    numbers with determiners

Numbers can be used after determiners. Before determiners, a structure
with of is necessary.

You're my one hope.

One of my friends gave me this. (not Qnemy-friend-...)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark52>>13    eleven hundred etc

In an informal style we often use eleven hundred, twelve hundred etc
instead of one thousand one hundred etc. This is most common with round
numbers between 1,100 and 1,900.

We only got fifteen hundred pounds for the car.

This form is used in historical dates (see 152).

He was born in thirteen hundred

It was built in fifteen (hundred and) twenty-nine.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark53>>14    billion

A billion is a thousand million. (But in older British usage a billion
was a million million.)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark54>>15    five hundred etc without -s

After a number, the words dozen, hundred, thousand, million and billion
have no final -5, and o/ is not used. This also happens after several
and a /eu>. Compare:

-    five hundred pounds    - a few million years hundreds of pounds
millions of years

-    several thousand times It cost thousands.

Singular forms are used as modifiers before nouns in plural measuring
expressions.

a five-pound note (not a-five-pounds note) a three-mile walk    a
four-foot deep hole

six two-hour lessons a six-foot tall man a three-month-old baby In an
informal style, we often use foot instead of feet in other structures,
especially when we talk about people's heights.

My father's just over six foot two.

For the use of be in measurements, see 92.

For the use of possessive forms in expressions of time (e.g. ten
minutes' walk; four days'journey), see 440-444.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark55>>16    British money (pre-euro)

There are 100 pence in a pound. Sums of money are named as follows:

Ip one penny (informal one p f/pi:/) or a penny)

5p five pence (informal five p)

£3.75 three pounds seventy-five (pence) or three pounds and seventy-five
pence (more formal)

Some people now use the plural pence as a singular in informal speech;
pound is sometimes used informally as a plural.

That's two pounds and one pence, please.

It cost me eight pound fifty.

Singular forms are used in expressions like a five-pound note (see
above). However, pence is often used instead of penny (a five pence
stamp).

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark56>>17    American money

There are 100 cents (C) in a dollar ($). One-cent coins are called
pennies; five-cent coins are nickels; ten-cent coins are dimes; a
twenty-five cent coin is a quarter.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark57>>18    non-metric measures

In recent years, Britain has adopted some metric measurement units, but
nonmetric measures are still quite widely used. America uses mainly
non-metric units. Approximate values are as follows:    »

1 inch (1 in) = 2.5 cm

12 inches = 1 foot (30 cm)

3 feet (3 ft) = 1 yard (90 cm)

5,280 feet / 1,760 yards = 1 mile (1.6 km)

5 miles = 8 km 1 ounce (1 oz) - 28 gm 16 ounces - 1 pound (455 gm)

2.2 pounds (2.2 lb) = 1 kg

14 pounds (14 lb) = 1 stone (6.4 kg) (BrE only)

1 British pint = 56.8 cl 1 US pint = 47.3 cl

8 pints (8 pt) = 1 gallon 1 British gallon = 4.55 litres 1 US gallon =
3.78 litres 1 acre = 4,840 square yards = 0.4 hectares 1 square mile =
640 acres - 259 ha British people measure their weight in stones and
pounds or (more recendy) in kilograms; Americans just use pounds. Height
is measured in feet, distance can also be measured in feet, but longer
distances are often measured in yards, especially in British English.

1    weigh eight stone six. (not ... eight stones six)

We are now flying at an altitude of28,000 feet

The car park's straight on, about 500 yards on the right

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark58>>19    area and volume

We say, for example, that a room is twelve feet by fifteen feet_{t} or
that a garden is thirty metres by forty-eight metres.

A room twelve feet by twelve feet can be called twelve feet square, the
total area is 144 square feet

A container 2 metres by 2 metres by 3 metres has a volume of 12 cubic
metres.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark59>>20    a and per

When we relate two different measures, we usually use alan; per is often
used in formal writing.

It costs two pounds a week, (or ... £2 per week.)

We're doing seventy miles an hour. (or ... 70 miles per hour / mph.)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark60>>21    numbers not used as complements after
be

Numbers are used as subjects or objects, but not usually as complements
after be.

I've got three sisters, (not Mysisters-are three.)

There are twelve of us in my family. (More natural than We are
twelve...)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark61>>22    spoken calculations

Common ways of saying calculations in British English are:

2    + 2 = 4 Two and two is/are four. (informal)

Two plus two equals/is four, (formal)

7-4 = 3 Four from seven is/leaves three, (informal)

Seven take away four is/leaves three, (informal)

Seven minus four equalsfis three, (formal)

3 x 4 = 12 Three fours are twelve. (informal)

Three times four is twelve. (informal)

Three multiplied by four equals/is twelve, (formal)

9 -r 3 = 3 Three(s) into nine goes three (times), (informal)

Nine divided by three equalsfis three, (formal)

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark62>>23 example of a spoken calculation

Here, for interest, is a multiplication (146x281) together with all its
steps, in the words that a British English speaker might have used as
he/she was working it out on paper before the days of pocket
calculators.

146 x 281

29200

11680

146

41026

A hundred and forty-six times two hundred and eighty-one.

beginning: Put down two noughts. Two sixes are twelve; put down two and
carry one; two fours are eight and one are nine; two ones are two.

next line: Put down one nought. Eight sixes are forty-eight; put down
eight and carry four; eight fours are thirty-two and four is thirty-six;
put down six and carry three; eight ones are eight and three is eleven.

next line: One times 146 is 146.

addition: Six and nought and nought is six; eight and four and nought is

twelve; put down two and carry one; six and two are eight and one is
nine and one is ten; put down nought and carry one; nine and one are ten
and one is eleven; put down one and carry one; two and one are three and
one are four.

total: forty-one thousand and twenty-six.

Note how is and are can often be used interchangeably.

For ways of saying and writing dates, see 152.

For ways of telling the time, see 579.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark63>>390 of course

We use of course (not) to mean ‘as everybody knows' or ‘as is obvious'.

It looks as if the sun goes round the earth, but of course that's not
true. We'll leave at eight o'clock: Granny won't be coming of course.

Of course can be used as a polite reply to a request.

Could you help me? ~ Of course.

But of course is not always a very polite reply to a statement of fact.

It's cold. ~It certainly is. (not Of course it is - this would suggest
that the first speaker had said something too obvious to be worth
mentioning.)

For the use of of course to structure arguments, see 157.5.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark64>>391    often

Often is mostly used for habitual behaviour, to mean ‘a lot of times on
different occasions'. To say ‘a lot of times on one occasion', we
normally use another expression (e.g. a lot of times, several times,
keep .. .ing). Compare:

I often fell in love when I was younger.

I fell several times yesterday when I was skiing, or / kept falling
yesterday... (not I often fdbyesterday...)

Note that often has two common pronunciations, with and without t:
/‘nfan/ and /‘often/.

For the position of often and other adverbs of indefinite frequency, see
24.

<<main-24.xhtml#bookmark65>>392    older English verb forms

The English of a few hundred years ago was different in many ways from
modern English - grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation and spelling have
all changed greatly since Shakespeare's time. Some of the most striking
differences are in the way verbs are used. Older English had distinct
second-person singular verb forms ending in -st, with a corresponding
second-person singular pronoun thou (object form thee, possessives thy,
thine). There were also third-person singular verb forms ending in -th,
and ye could be used as a second-person plural pronoun.

Tell me what thou knowest.    How can I help thee?

Where thy master goeth, there goest thou also.

Oh come, all ye faithful Older forms of be included second-person
singular art and wert.

I fear thou art sick.    Wert thou at work today?

Questions and negatives were originally made without do; later, forms
with and without do (including affirmative forms with do) were both
common. Came you by sea or by land? Be not afraid.

They know not what they do. Then he did take my hand and kiss it. Simple
tenses were often used in cases where modem English has progressive
forms.

We go not out today, for it raineth.

Subjunctives (see 567) were more widely used than in modern English.

If she be here, then tell her I wait her pleasure.

Inversion (see 302-303) was more common, and infinitives and past
participles could come later in a clause than in modem English.

Now are we lost indeed.

Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended. (Shakespeare)

And she me caught in her arms long and small and therewithal so sweetly
did me kiss and softly said ‘Dear heart, how like you this?' (Wyatt)

Some of these forms were still used in 19th-century and early
20th-century literature (particularly poetry) long after they had died
out of normal usage. Modem writers of historical novels, films or plays
often make their characters use some of these older forms in order to
give a ‘period* flavour to the language. And the forms also survive in
certain contexts where tradition

is especially valued - for example the language of religious services,
public ceremonies and the law. Some dialects, too, preserve forms which
have disappeared from the rest of the language - second-person singular
pronouns (tha, thee etc) are still used by many people in Yorkshire.

<<main-25.xhtml>>

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark0>>393    once: adverb

When once means ‘at some time', we use it for the past but not for the
future. To refer to an indefinite future time, we can use sometime or
one day. Compare:

-    I met her once in Venezuela.

Once upon a time there was a beautiful princess.

-    Come up and see me sometime, (not €ome-up-andsee-me-once.)

We must go walking one day. (not We must go walking once.)

When once has the more precise meaning of 'one time (not twice or three
times)', it can be used to talk about any time, including the future.

I'm only going to say this once.

Note that at once means ‘immediately*.

Can I have the bill? ~At once, sir.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark1>>394    once: conjunction

Once can be used as a conjunction, meaning ‘after*, ‘as soon as*. It
often suggests that something is finished or completed, and is most
often used with a perfect tense.

Once you've passed your test I'll let you drive my car.

Once he had found somewhere to live he started looking for work.

Once you know how to ride a bike you never forget it.

Note that we do not use that after once (not Once that you've passed
your test-...).

For present perfect instead of future perfect after conjunctions, see
580.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark2>>395    one: substitute word

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark3>>1    use

We often use one instead of repeating a singular countable noun.

Which is your boy? ~ The one in the blue coat.

I'd like a cake. A big one with lots of cream.

Can you lend me a pen? ~ Sorry, I haven't got one.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    a ... one

We drop a if there is no adjective. Compare:

I'm looking for a flat. I'd like a small one with a garden.

I'd like one with a garden, (not ...-a-one-mth-a-garden.)    ►

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    ones

One has a plural ones.

I'd like to try on those shoes. ~ Which ones? ~ The ones in the window.
Green apples often taste better than red ones.

What sort of sweets do you like? ~Ones with chocolate inside

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark6>>4    uncountable nouns

We do not use one(s) for uncountable nouns. Compare:

If you haven*t got a fresh chicken fll take a frozen one

If you haven't got fresh cream fll take tinned (cream), (not ... tinned
one.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark7>>5    which (one), this (one) etc

We can leave out one(s) immediately after which, this, that, another,
either, neither and superlatives.

Which (one) would you like? ~ This (one) looks the nicest.

Let's have another (one). Either (one) will suit me.

I think my dog's the fastest (one).

But we cannot leave out one(s) if there is an adjective.

This blue one looks the nicest, (not This blue looks ...)

We nearly always leave out ones after these and those.

I don't think much of these. (More natural than ... these ones.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark8>>6    not used after my etc, some, several, a
few, both or a number

We do not use one(s) immediately after my, your etc, some, several, (a)
few, both or a number.

Take your coat and pass me mine, (not ... pass-me-my-one:)

Are there any grapes? ~Yes, I bought some today, (not ... I bought some
ones today.) fll take both, (not ... both ones-)

She bought six. (not ... six-ones:)

But one(s) is used if there is an adjective. fll wear my old one. (not
... my old:)

I bought some sweet ones today. (not I bought some sweet today.)

Has the cat had her kittens? ~ Yes, she's had four white ones, (not ...
four white.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark9>>7    that of

One(s) is not normally used after a noun with possessive's. Instead, we
can either just drop one(s), or use a structure with that/those of (more
formal).

A grandparent's job is easier than a parent's, (not ... than a parent's
one.) A grandparent's job is easier than that of a parent( not ... than
theone-ofa parent)

Trollope's novels are more entertaining than those of Dickens, (not ...
than Diekens\^nes / the ones of Dickens.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark10>>8    noun modifiers

One(s) is not generally used after noun modifiers.

Do you need coffee cups or tea cups? (not ... or tea ones.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark11>>9 One(s) always refers back

We use one(s) to avoid repeating a noun which has been mentioned before.
It cannot normally be used in other cases.

Let's go and ask the old man for advice, (not .. . -ask the-old one...)

396 one, you and they:

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark12>>indefinite personal pronouns

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark13>>1    one and you: meaning

We can use one or you to talk about people in general, including the
speaker and hearer.

One/You cannot learn a language in six weeks.

One/You should never give people advice.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark14>>2    one and you: formality and class

One is more formal than you (and more common in writing than in speech).
Compare:

If you want to make people angry, you just have to tell them the truth.

If one wishes to make oneself thoroughly unpopular, one has merely to
tell people the truth.

One is often considered typical of more upper-class and intellectual
usage, and is avoided by many people for this reason.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark15>>3    one and you: only used in
generalisations

One and you are only used in this way in very general statements, when
we are talking about 'anyone, at any time*. Compare:

-    One/You can usually find people who speak English in Sweden.

English is spoken in this shop. or They speak English in this shop, (not
One speaks English... - the meaning is not ‘people in general')

-    One/You should knock before going into somebody's room.

Somebody's knocking at the door (not One is knocking...)

-    It can take you/one ages to get served in this pub.

Thanks, I'm being served (not Thanksrone is serving me.)

One generally has a singular meaning: ‘any individual'; it is not used
to refer to whole groups.

We speak a strange dialect where I come from. (not One speaks a strange
dialect where I come from.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark16>>4    people including the speaker/hearer

One is not used for people who could not include the speaker; you is not
used for people who could not include the hearer. Compare:

One/You must believe in something.

In the sixteenth century people believed in witches.

(not ... one/you believed in witches - this could not include the
speaker or hearer.)    »

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark17>>5    one/you as subject object etc

One can be a subject or object; there is a possessive one's and a
reflexive pronoun oneself.

He talks to one like a teacher. One's family can be very difficult.

One should always give oneself plenty of time to pack.

Youfyourlyourself can be used in similar ways.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark18>>6    they

They has a rather different, less general kind of meaning than one and
you. It usually refers to a particular but rather vague group (for
example the neighbours, the people around, the authorities).

They don't like strangers round here.

They're going to widen the road soon.

I bet they put taxes up next year.

Note also the common expression they say (= people say).

They say her husbands been seeing that Mrs Hastings again, (not One-

yctys . • * j

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark19>>397    one of ...

After one of we normally use a plural form.

one of our cats (not one of our cat)

Occasionally one of is used with a singular noun referring to a group.

Why don't you ask one of the crew?

A following verb is normally singular.

One of our cats has disappeared, (not One of our cats have disappeared.)
After one of a noun phrase must have a determiner (e.g. the, my, those).

one of the/my/those horses (but not one of horses)

Of cannot be dropped.

one of my friends (not one~my~friend or one-my friends)

For sentences like She's one of the only women who have/has climbed
Everest, see 529.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark20>>398    only: focusing adverb

Only can be used as a 'focusing adverb' (see 24.6). It can refer to
different parts of a sentence.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark21>>1    referring to the subject

Only normally comes before a subject that it refers to.

Only you could do a thing like that.

Only my mother really understands me.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark22>>2    referring to other parts of a sentence

When only refers to another part of a sentence, it often goes in
'mid-position* with the verb (see 24 for details).

She only reads biographies.    She is only on duty on Tuesdays.

I only like swimming in the sea    Vve only been to India once.

She was only talking like that because she was nervous.

open 399

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark23>>3    ambiguous sentences

Sometimes sentences with only are ambiguous (they can be understood in
more than one way).

/ only kissed your sister last night. (The sense can be ‘only kissed*,
‘only your sister* or ‘only last night*.)

In speech, the meaning is usually clear because the speaker stresses the
part of the sentence that only refers to. Even in writing, the context
generally stops sentences like these from being really ambiguous.
However, if necessary only can be put direcdy before the object,
complement or adverbial expression that it refers to. This is rather
formal. Compare:

They only play poker on Saturday nights, (could be ambiguous)

They play only poker on Saturday nights.

They play poker only on Saturday nights.

The meaning can also be made more precise with a relative structure.

Poker is the only game (that) they play on Saturday nights.

Saturday nights are the only time (that) they play poker.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark24>>4    only today etc

Only with a time expression can mean ‘as recently as*, ‘not before*.

I sa w her only today - she looks much better:

My shoes will only be ready on Friday

Only then did she realise what she had agreed to.

For inverted word order after only, as in the last example above, see
302.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark25>>399 open

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark26>>1    open and opened

We normally use open, not opened, as an adjective.

I can read you like an open book, (not .. .-an-opened book.)

Are the banks open this afternoon? (not Are the bartks-opened-.. .7)

Opened is used as the past tense and past participle of the verb open,
to talk about the action of opening.

She opened her eyes and sat up. The safe was opened with dynamite.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark27>>2    when open is not used

Note that open is not the normal word to refer to the fastenings of
clothes, or to switches or taps.

I can't untie/undo this shoelace, (not I can't open this shoelace.)

How do you unfasten this belt?

Could you turn/switch the radio on? (not .. .-open -the radio7)

Who left the taps turned on? (not Who Heft the taps-open?)

For closed and shut, see 132.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark28>>400    opportunity and possibility

We often say that somebody has the opportunity to do / of doing
something.

I have the opportunity to go to Denmark next year. (= I can go ...)
Possibility is not often used in this structure. It is more normal to
say that there is a possibility of something happening.

There's a possibility of my going to Denmark next yean (= I may go ...)
(not I have the possibility to go to Denmark-...)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark29>>401    opposite (adjective): position

We put the adjective opposite before a noun when we are talking about
one of a pair of things that naturally face or contrast with each other.

I think the picture would look better on the opposite walL She went off
in the opposite direction.

Vve got exactly the opposite opinion to yours.

His brother was fighting on the opposite side.

We put opposite after the noun when it means ‘facing the speaker or
listener* or 'facing a person or place that has already been mentioned'.

I noticed that the man opposite was staring at me (not ... the opposite
man was staring at me;)

You can see the cinema programmes on the notice opposite.

The man she was looking for was in the shop directly opposite.

For opposite and in front of, see 402.

For opposite and contrary, see 144.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark30>>402    opposite, facing and in front of

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark31>>1    "across a road/room etc from':
opposite/facing

We do not use in front of to mean 'across a road/river/room etc from'.
This idea is usually expressed with opposite or facing. (AmE also across
from.) There's a garage opposite my house, (not .. .-infront
ofmy-house.)

She stood at the other side of the table facing me. (not ... in front of
me.) The man sitting across from me was smoking a pipe. (AmE)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark32>>2    in front of and opposite

Compare:

There's a bus stop in front of the school.

(The bus stop is on the same side of the road as the school.)

There's a bus stop opposite the school

(The bus stop is on the other side of the road from the school.)

In front of is often the opposite of behind.

The woman in front of me in the post-office queue had a complicated
problem. I always find myself behind people like that

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark33>>3 in front of and in the front of

If you are in front of a place, vehicle etc you are outside it; if you
are in the front of it you are inside. Compare:

We stood in front of her car so that she couldn't drive off.

Her husband was sitting in the front of the car. He looked frightened

For the difference between before and in front of see 98.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark34>>403 ought

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark35>>1    forms

Ought is a modal auxiliary verb (see 353-354). The third person singular
has no -s.

She ought to understand, (not She oughts-...)

Questions and negatives are made without do.

Ought we to go now? (not Do we ought...?)

It oughtn't to rain today.

After ought, we use the infinitive with to before other verbs. (This
makes ought different from other modal auxiliary verbs.)

You ought to see a dentist To is not used in question tags.

We ought to wake Helen, oughtn't we? (not ... oughtn't -we-to?)

In American English, interrogative and contracted negative forms of
ought to are rare; should is generally used instead.

He ought to be here soon_{f} shouldn't he?

In some English dialects, questions and negatives are made with did
(e.g. She didn't ought to do that), but this structure is not used in
standard English.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark36>>2    obligation: I ought to phone Mother

We can use ought to advise people (including ourselves) to do things; to
tell people that they have a duty to do things; to ask about our duty.
The meaning is very similar to that of should; it is not so strong as
must (see 520). Ought is less frequent than should.

What time ought I to arrive?

I really ought to phone Mother.

People ought not to drive like that He ought to get a medal for living
with her.

There ought to be traffic lights at this crossroads.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark37>>3    deduction: He ought to be here soon

We can also use ought (like should) to say that we guess or conclude
that something is probable (because it is logical or normal).

Henry ought to be here soon - he left home at six.

We're spending the winter in Miami. That ought to be nice.

The weather ought to improve after the weekend    ►

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark38>>4    questions

The normal question forms of ought are rather formal. In an informal
style they are often avoided, for example by using a structure with
think... ought or by using should.

Do you think we ought to go now? (Less formal than Ought we to ...?)
Should we go now?

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark39>>5    ought to have...

Ought has no past form, but we can use ought to have + past participle
to talk about things which were supposed to happen but did not.

I ought to have phoned Ed this morning, but I forgot, (not I ought to
phone Ed this morningr but I-forgot)

The structure can also be used to make guesses or draw conclusions about
things which are not certain to have happened.

Bill ought to have got back home yesterday. Has anybody seen him?

It is also possible to talk about things that ought to have happened by
now, or by a future time.

Ten o'clock She ought to have arrived at her office by now.

We ought to have finished painting the house by the end of next week

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark40>>6    word order

Mid-position adverbs like always, never, really (see 24) can go before
or after ought in a verb phrase* The position before ought is less
formal.

You always ought to carry some spare money. (less formal)

You ought always to carry some spare money, (more formal)

In negative clauses, not comes before to.

You ought not to go. / You oughtn't to go. (not You ought to not go.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark41>>404 out of

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark42>>1    movement

The opposite of the preposition into is out of

She ran out of the room, (not She ran out the room, or She ran out from
the room.)

I took Harry's letter out of my pocket Out of is also used to mean
‘through', when we mention the opening through which somebody/something
goes out.

/ walked out of the front door without looking back Why did you throw
the paper out of the window?

In American English, out is normally used without of in this case.

She turned and went out the back door. (AmE)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark43>>2    position

Out of can also be used to talk about position - the opposite of in.

Vm afraid Mr Pallery is out of the office at the moment

For into and in, see 269.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark44>>405    own

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark45>>1    after possessives

We only use own after a possessive word. It cannot direcdy follow an
article. It's nice if a child can have his or her own room, (not ... an
own room.) Car hire is expensive. It's cheaper to take one's own car.
(not .. . the-own ear:)

Vm my own boss.

2    a/some ...of one's own

This structure makes it possible to include a/an, some or another
determiner in the phrase.

I'd like to have a car of my own.

It's time you found some friends of your own.

He's got no ideas of his own.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark46>>3    own with no following noun

We cannot use mine, yours etc with own, but we can drop a noun after my
own, your own etc if the meaning is clear.

Would you like to use my pen? ~No, thanks. I can only write with my own.
(not ... mine-own.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark47>>4    own and -self

The emphatic and reflexive pronouns myself, yourself etc (see 493) do
not have possessive forms. My own etc is used instead.

YU do it myself and I'll do it in my own way. (not ... in myself s way.)
She can wash herself and brush her own hair now. (not ... brush herself
s

TrCrflT\^

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark48>>5    on one's own

Note the two meanings of on one's own.

My mother lives on her own. (without company)

Don't help him. Let him do it on his own. (without help)

For by oneself used in similar ways, see 493.6.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark49>>406    paragraphs

Written English text is usually divided into blocks called ‘paragraphs',
to make it easier to read. Paragraphs can vary in length, from several
hundred words (for example in literary or academic writing), to a few
sentences (for example in journalism or letters). A paragraph division
is usually shown by starting the text on a new line and ‘indenting'
(leaving a space at the beginning of the line). The paragraph divisions
break the material up into easily 'digestible^{1} sections, providing
places where the reader can pause and think for a moment if necessary.
And good writers can show the structure of their texts by making
paragraph divisions in suitable places, for example when they move to a
new stage in a story, a new point in a discussion or a new part of a
description.

►

Bill decided that it was too late to start slimming, and put some more
sugar in his coffee. The way things were, he needed all the help he
could get. Everything was going wrong at work, everything had already
gone wrong at home, and the weather in Edinburgh in November was lousy.
The only remaining question was: should he commit suicide now or wait
till after payday and get drunk first?

Three months ago everything had seemed so perfect His boss had told him
that he had an excellent future with the firm.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

a new stage in the story

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

There are a lot of advantages to working at home. You don't have to
travel to your job, you can choose your own working hours, you can take
a day off if you want to_{t} you don't waste time in endless unnecessary
meetings, and -perhaps most important of all-you don't have a boss
constantly checking up on you.

■> On the other hand, it can be lonely working by yourself Without
colleagues around you ...

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

a new point in the discussion

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Another practice, common in typed letters and documents, is to leave a
blank line without indenting.

Dear Sirs

Three months ago I sent you an order for a set of glasses, together with
a cheque in full payment You wrote acknowledging my order, and said that
the glasses would be dispatched within 15 days.

I have still not received the glasses, and repeated telephone calls to
your office have had no result...

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark50>>407    part

A is usually dropped before part of if there is no adjective.

Part of the roof was missing. (BUT A large part of the roof was
missing.) Part of the trouble is that I can't see very well (More
natural than A part of the trouble...)

Jan was in Australia part of last yean

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark51>>408    participles (-ing and -ed forms) (1):
introduction

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark52>>1 names

When -ing forms are used in certain ways, for example as parts of verb
forms, or like adjectives (see below) they are called ‘present
participles'. Forms like broken, gone, opened, started are called ‘past
participles'. These are not very suitable names: both forms can be used
to talk about the past, present or future.

She was crying when I saw hen Who's the man talking to Elizabeth?

This time tomorrow I'll be lying on the beach.

It was broken in the storm.    The kids are excited

The new school is going to be opened next week

For the spelling of participles, see 560-562.

For -ing forms used like nouns (‘gerunds'), in sentences like Smoking is
bad Jot you, see 293-299.

a verb forms

Participles are used with the auxiliary verbs be and have to make
progressive, perfect and passive verb forms.

It was raining when I got home.

Vve forgotten your name.    You'll be told as soon as possible.

Present and past participles can be put together to make progressive and
perfect forms (e.g. being employed, having arrived, having been
invited).

b adjectives

Participles can be used like adjectives.

I love the noise of falling rain.    John has become very boring.

She says she's got a broken heart. The house looked abandoned

c adverbs

Sometimes participles are used like adverbs.

She ran screaming out of the room.

d clauses

Participles can combine with other words into clause-like structures.

Who's the fat man sitting in the comer?

Having lost all my money, I went home

Most of the people invited to the party didn't turn up.

Rejected by all his friends, he decided to become a monk.

For details of these uses, see the following sections.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark53>>409 participles (2): active and passive

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark54>>1    active present participles, passive
past participles

When -ing forms are used like adjectives or adverbs, they have similar
meanings to active verbs.

falling leaves (= leaves that fall) a meat-eating animal (= an animal
that eats meat)

She walked out smiling. (= She was smiling.)

Most past participles have passive meanings when they are used like
adjectives or adverbs.

a broken heart (= a heart that has been broken)

He lived alone, forgotten by everybody. (= He had been forgotten by
everybody.)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    interested and interesting etc

Interested, bored, excited etc say how people feel.

Interesting, boring etc describe the people or things that cause the
feelings. Compare:

- I was very interested in the lesson. (not I■ was very interesting irt
the-lesson.) The lesson was really interesting.    ►

-    I didn't enjoy the party because I was bored (not ... becauseI was
boring:) It was a terribly boring party.

-    The children always get excited when Granny comes. (not The
children

always get exciting...)

Granny takes the children to exciting places.

-    His explanations make me very confused (not ... make-me very
confusing:) He's a very confusing writer.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark56>>3    exceptions: a fallen leaf, an escaped
prisoner etc

A few past participles can be used as adjectives with active meanings,
especially before nouns. Examples:

a fallen leaf (= a leaf that has fallen)

advanced students (= students who have advanced to a high level, not
students who have been advanced ...) developed countries a grown-up
daughter increased activity    an escaped prisoner

vanished civilisations faded colours a retired general    swollen ankles

Rescuers are still working in the ruins of the collapsed hotel.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark57>>4    active past participles: advanced
points

Some more past participles can be used with active meanings, but only
with adverbs. Examples:

a well-read person (but not a read person) a much-travelled man
   recently-arrived immigrants

The train just arrived at platform six is the delayed 13.15 from
Hereford Some active past participles can be used after be. Examples:

She is retired now.    Those curtains are badly faded.

My family are all grown up now This class is the most advanced
Recovered, camped, stopped, finished (see 205) and gone (see 229) are
used in this way after be, but not usually before nouns.

Why are all those cars stopped at the crossroads? (but not. .. a
stopped-eetr) I hope you're fully recovered from your operation.

We're camped in the field across the stream.

I'll be finished in a few minutes.    Those days are gone now.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark58>>410 participles (3): details

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark59>>1 used as adjectives: an interesting book

Participles can often be used as adjectives before nouns, or after be
and other link verbs.

an interesting book a lost dog

a falling leaf    The upstairs toilet window is broken,

screaming children His idea seems exciting,

Participles used as adjectives can have objects. Note the word order.
English-speaking Canadians, (not speaking-English Canadians.) a
fax-hunting man    Is that watch self-winding?

Other compound structures with participles are also common before nouns.
quick-growing trees    government-inspired rumours

home-made cake    the above-mentioned point

a recently-built house

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark60>>2    after nouns: the people questioned

We often use participles after nouns in order to define or identify the
nouns, in the same way as we use identifying relative clauses (see 495).

We couldn't agree on any of the problems discussed (= ... the problems
that were discussed.) (not ... the discussed prtfutetTts:)

The people questioned gave very different opinions.

(= The people who were questioned .. J (not ¥he-qttestioned people...) I
watched the match because I knew some of the people playing, (not ..
.-fhe playing people:)

I got the only ticket left, (not .. .-the only left-ticket)

Those is often used with a participle to mean ‘the ones who are/were'.

Most of those questioned refused to answer.

Those selected will begin training on Monday.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark61>>3    differences of meaning

A few participles change their meaning according to their position.
Compare:

-    a concerned expression (= a worried expression)

the people concerned (= the people who are/were affected)

-    an involved explanation (= a complicated explanation) the people
involved (= the same as the people concerned)

-    an adopted child (= a child who is brought up by people who are not
his/her

biological parents) the solution adopted (= the solution that is/was
chosen)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark62>>4    much or very with past participles

When a past participle is part of a passive verb, we can put much or
very much before it, but not very.

He's (very) much admired by his students. (not ..very-admired...)
Britain's trade position has been (very) much weakened by inflation.

(not ... very weakened...)

When a past participle is used as an adjective, we usually prefer very.
This is common with words referring to mental states, feelings and
reactions. a very frightened animal (not a much frightened animal) a
very shocked expression The children were very bored She looked very
surprised Common exceptions:

That's Alice, unless I'm (very) much mistaken, (not ... unless I'm very

7/TwtCtiCC77T» J

He's well known in the art world, (not ... very known...)    ►

With amused, very and (very) much are both possible.

/ was very amused / much amused / very much amused by Miranda's
performance.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark63>>5    frightened by / frightened of

By is used after passive verbs to introduce the agent (the person or
thing that does the action - see 413).

Most of the damage was caused by your sister After past participles that
are used like adjectives, we prefer other prepositions. Compare:

-    She was frightened by a mouse that ran into the room.

(Frightened is part of a passive verb referring to an action.)

She's always been terribly frightened of dying.

(Frightened is an adjective referring to a state of mind.)

-    The kids were so excited by the music that they kept screaming.

Joe^{f}s excited about the possibility of going to the States.

-    I was annoyed by the way she spoke to me.

Vm annoyed with you.

-    The burglar was surprised by the family coming home unexpectedly.

Vm surprised at/by your attitude.

-    He was badly shocked by his fall

We were shocked at/by the prices in London.

Other examples:

His whereabouts are known to the police.

The hills are covered in snow.

The room was filled with thick smoke.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark64>>6    special past participle forms

A few older forms of past participles are still used as adjectives
before nouns in certain expressions.

drunken laughter/singing etc a sunken wreck/ship etc a shrunken head
   rotten fruit/vegetables etc

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark65>>411 participles (4): clauses

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark66>>1    structures

Participles can combine with other words into participle clauses.

There's a woman crying her eyes out over there.

Most of the people invited to the reception were old friends.

Not knowing what to do, I telephoned the police.

Served with milk and sugar, it makes a delicious breakfast

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark67>>2    after nouns: the people invited to the
party

Participle clauses can be used after nouns and pronouns.

We can offer you a job cleaning cars.

There's Neville, eating as usual.

In came the first runner, closely followed by the second I found him
sitting at a table covered with papers.

Participle clauses are often very like relative clauses (see 494.5),
except that they have participles instead of complete verbs.

Who's the girl dancing with your brother? (= ... the girl who is
dancing...) Anyone touching that wire will get a shock. (= Anyone who
touches ...) Half of the people invited to the party didn't turn up. (=
... who were invited ...)

Perfect participles are not often used in this way.

Do you know anybody who's lost a cat? (not Boyett-know anybody having
lo$t~a cat?)

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark68>>3    adverbial clauses: Putting down my
paper, I...

Participle clauses can also be used in similar ways to full adverbial
clauses, expressing condition, reason, time relations, result etc. (This
can only happen, of course, when the idea of condition, reason etc is so
clear that no conjunction is needed to signal it.) Adverbial participle
clauses are usually rather formal.

Used economically, one tin will last for six weeks. (= If it is used
...) Having failed my medical exams, I took up teaching. (= As I had
failed ...) Putting down my newspaper, I walked over to the window.

(= After I had put down my newspaper, .. J It rained for two weeks on
end, completely ruining our holiday.

(= ... so that it completely ruined our holiday.)

Note that -ing clauses can be made with verbs like be, have, wish and
know, which are not normally used in progressive tenses (see 471). In
these cases, the participle clause usually expresses reason or cause.

Being unable to help in any other way, I gave her some money.

Not wishing to continue my studies, I decided to become a dress
designer. Knowing her pretty well, I realised something was wrong.

<<main-25.xhtml#bookmark69>>4    subjects; misrelated participles

Normally the subject of an adverbial participle clause is the same as
the subject of the main clause in a sentence.

My wife had a talk with Sally, explaining the problem. {My wife is the
subject of explaining.)

It is often considered incorrect to make sentences with 'misrelated
participles', where an adverb clause has a different subject from the
main clause.

Looking out of the window of our hotel room, there was a wonderful range
of mountains. (This could sound as if the mountains were looking out of
the window.)

However, sentences like these are common and often seem quite natural,
particularly when the main clause has preparatory it or there as a
subject. Being French, it^{f}s surprising that she's such a terrible
cook.

Having so little time, there was not much that 1 could do.

‘Misrelated participles' are normal in some fixed expressions referring
to the speaker's attitude. Examples:

Generally speaking, men can run faster than women.

Broadly speaking, dogs are more faithful than cats.

Judging from his expression, he's in a bad mood Considering everything,
it wasn't a bad holiday.

Supposing there was a war, what would you do?

Taking everything into consideration, they ought to get another chance.
►

<<main-26.xhtml>>

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark0>>5    participle clauses with their own
subjects

A participle clause can have its own subject. This happens most often in
a rather formal style.

Nobody having any more to say, the meeting was closed.

All the money having been spent, we started looking for work.

A little girl walked past, her doll dragging behind her on the pavement
Hands held high, the dancers circle to the right The subject is often
introduced by with when the clause expresses accompanying circumstances.

A car roared past with smoke pouring from the exhaust With Peter working
in Birmingham, and Lucy travelling most of the week, the house seems
pretty empty.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark1>>6    participle clauses after conjunctions
and prepositions

-ing clauses can be used after many conjunctions and prepositions. They
are common with after, before, since, when, while, on, without, instead
of, in spite of and as. Note that -ing forms after prepositions can
often be considered as either participles or gerunds - the dividing line
is not clear (see 293).

After talking to you I always feel better.

After having annoyed everybody he went home.

Depress clutch before changing gear.

She's been quite different since coming back from America.

When telephoning from abroad, dial 1865, not 01865.

On being introduced, British people often shake hands.

They left without saying goodbye.

She struck me as being a very nervy kind of person.

Clauses with past participles are possible (mostly in a formal style)
after if, when_{t} while, once and until.

If asked to look after luggage for someone else, inform police at once.

When opened, keep in refrigerator.

Once deprived of oxygen, the brain dies.

Leave in oven until cooked to a light brown colour.

For clauses like when ready, see 73.4.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark2>>7    object complements

The structure object + participle (clause) is used after verbs of
sensation (e.g. see, hear, feel, watch, notice, smell) and some other
verbs (e.g. find, get, have, make).

I saw a small girl standing in the goldfish pond Have you ever heard a
nightingale singing?

I found her drinking my whisky.

We'll have to get the car repaired before Tuesday.

Do you think you can get the radio working?

Well soon have you walking again.

I can make myself understood pretty well in English.

For more about structures with see and hear, see 242. Forger, see 224.
For have, see 238. For make, see 335.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark3>>412 passives (1): passive structures and verb
forms

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark4>>1 active and passive structures

Compare:

-    They built this house in 1486. (active)

This house was built in 1486. (passive)

-    Austrians speak German, (active)

German is spoken in Austria, (passive)

-    A friend of ours is repairing the roof (active)

The roof is being repaired by a friend of ours, (passive)

-    This book will change your life. (active)

Your life will be changed by this book (passive)

When A does something to B, there are often two ways to talk about it.
If we want A (the doer) to be the subject, we use an active verb: built,
speak_{t} is repairing. If we want B (the 'receiver' of the action) to
be the subject, we use: was built, is spoken, is being repaired, will be
changed.

The object of an active verb corresponds to the subject of a passive
verb.

In most cases, the subject of an active verb is not expressed in the
corresponding passive sentence. If it does have to be expressed, this
usually happens in an expression with by; the noun is called the 'agent'
(see 413). This house was built in 1486 by Sir John Latton.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark5>>2 passive verb forms

We normally make passive forms of a verb by using tenses of the
auxiliary be followed by the past participle (= pp) of the verb. (For
get as a passive auxiliary, see 223.5.) Here is a list of all the
passive forms of an ordinary English verb.

Construction

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Example

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Name

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

(simple) future future perfect

simple present present progressive

present perfect simple past past progressive past perfect will be +pp
will have been +pp

amlarelis + pp am/are/is being + pp

have/has been +pp was! were + pp was! were being + pp had been + pp

You'll be told soon enough. Everything will have been done by Tuesday
English is spoken here.

Excuse the mess; the house is being painted Has Mary been told?

I wasn't invited, but I went.

I felt as if I was being watched I knew why I had been chosen.

►

Future progressive passives (will be being + pp) and perfect progressive
passives (has been being + pp) are unusual.

Examples of passive infinitives: (to) be taken; (to) have been invited.

Examples of passive -ing forms: being watched; having been invited.

Note that verbs made up of more than one word (see 599-600) can have
passive forms if they are transitive.

The furniture was broken up for firewood.

She likes being looked at    I need to be taken care of.

He hates being made a fool of

For itiore about structures with prepositions at the ends of clauses,
see 452.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark6>>3    use of tenses

Passive tenses are normally used in the same way as active tenses. So
for example the present progressive passive is used, like the present
progressive active, to talk about things that are going on at the time
of speaking (see 464). The papers are being prepared now.

The secretary is preparing the papers now.

And the present perfect passive can be used, like the present perfect
active, to talk about finished actions with present consequences (see
455).

Alex has been arrested1    The police have arrested Alex!

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark7>>4    verbs not used in the passive

Not all verbs can have passive forms. Passive structures are impossible
with intransitive verbs (see 606.2) like die or arrive, which cannot
have objects, because there is nothing to become the subject of a
passive sentence. Some transitive verbs, too, are seldom used in the
passive. Most of these arc ‘stative verbs' (verbs which refer to states,
not actions). Examples are fit, have, lack, resemble, suit

They have a nice house, (but not A nice house is had by them.)

My shoes don't fit me. (but not Tm not fttted-bymy shoes.)

Sylvia resembles a Greek goddess, (but not A Greek goddess is resembled
by Sylvia.)

Your mother lacks tact (but not Tact is-iacked-...)

She was having a bath, (but not A-bath was being had by her.)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark8>>5    confusing forms

Students often confuse active and passive verb forms in English. Typical
mistakes:

I-was-very-interesting in the lesson.

We were questioning by-the immigration officer.

She has put -in-prison for life.

Mistakes like these are not surprising, because:

1.    Be is used to make both passive verb forms and active progressive
tenses.

2.    Past participles are used to make both passive verb forms and
active perfect tenses. Compare:

He was calling. (active - past progressive)

He was called, (passive - simple past)

He has called (active - present perfect)

For active verb forms, see 10.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark9>>413    passives (2): agent

In a passive clause, we usually use by to introduce the agent - the
person or thing that does the action, or that causes what happens.
(Note, however, that agents are mentioned in only about 20 per cent of
passive clauses.)

All the trouble was caused by your mother.

These carpets are made by children who work twelve hours a day.

Some past participles can be more like adjectives than verbs (see 410):
for example shocked, worried, frightened. After these, we often use
other prepositions instead of by.

I was shocked at/by your attitude.

We were worried about/by her silence.

Are you frightened of spiders?

With is used when we talk about an instrument which is used by an agent
to do an action (see 119).

He was shot (by the policeman) with a rifle.

414    passives (3):

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark10>>When do we use passive structures?

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark11>>1 interest in the action

We often choose passive structures when we want to talk about an action,
but are not so interested in saying who or what does/did it Passives
without 'agents' (see 413) are common in academic and scientific writing
for this reason.

Those pyramids were built around 400 AD.

Too many books have been written about the Second World War.

The results have not yet been analysed.    ►

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark12>>2    putting the news at the end

We often prefer to begin a sentence with something that is already
known, or that we are already talking about, and to put the 'news' at
the end. This is another common reason for choosing passive structures.
Compare:

John's painting my portrait, (active verb so that the 'news' - the
portrait -can go at the end)

Nice picture. ~ Yes, it was painted by my grandmother. (passive verb so
that the 'news' - the painter - can go at the end)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark13>>3    keeping the same subject

In order to keep talking about the same person or thing, it may be
necessary to switch from active to passive and back.

He waited for two hours; then he was seen by a doctor; then he was sent
back to the waiting room. He sat there for another two hours - by this
time he was getting angry. Then he was taken upstairs and examined by a
specialist, after which he had to wait for another hour before he was
allowed to go home. (More natural than He waited for two hours; then a
doctor saw him ...)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark14>>4    putting heavier expressions at the end

Longer and heavier expressions often go at the end of a clause, and this
can also be a reason for choosing a passive structure.

I was annoyed by Mary wanting to tell everybody what to do (More natural
than Mary wanting to tell everybody what to do annoyed me - the phrase
Mary ...do would make a very long subject.)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark15>>5    meaning and grammar

Meaning and grammar do not always go together. Not all active verbs have
‘active' meanings; for instance, if you say that somebody receives
something or suffers, you are really saying that something is done to
him/her. Some English active verbs might be translated by passive or
reflexive verbs in certain other languages: e.g. My shoes are wearing
out; She is sitting; Suddenly the door opened. And some English passives
might be translated by active or reflexive verbs: e.g. I was bom in
1956; English is spoken here.

Some verbs can be used in both active and passive forms with similar
meanings: for example to worry / to be worried; to drown / to be drowned
(see 165). Sometimes active and passive infinitives can be used with
very similar meanings: for example There's a lot of work to do / to be
done (for details, see 287).

For more about verbs like open, see 609.

For more about reflexive verbs, see 493.

For active and passive past participles, see 409.

For -ing forms with passive meanings after need and want (e.g. My watch
needs cleaning), see 296.3.

For more about the way information is organised in sentences, see 512.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark16>>415 passives (4): verbs with two objects

Many verbs, such as give, send, show, lend, pay, promise, refuse, fe//,
offer, can be followed by two objects, an ‘indirect object' and a
‘direct object*. These usually refer to a person (indirect object) and a
thing (direct object). Two structures are possible.

A.    verb + indirect object + direct object She gave her sister the
car.

I had already shown the policewoman Sam's photo.

B.    verb + direct object + preposition + indirect object She gave the
car to her sister;

I had already shown Sam's photo to the policewoman.

Both of these structures can be made passive.

A.    indirect object becomes subject of passive verb Her sister was
given the car.

The policewoman had already been shown Sam's photo.

B.    direct object becomes subject of passive verb The car was given to
her sister

Sam's photo had already been shown to the policewoman.

The choice between the two passive structures may depend on what has
been said before, or on what needs to be put last in the sentence (see
414.2,4). Structure A (e.g. Her sister was given the car.) is the more
common of the two. More examples:

Vve just been sent a whole lot of information.

You were lent ten thousand pounds last year.

The visitors were shown a collection of old manuscripts.

They are being paid a lot of money for doing very little.

He was refused a visa because he had been in prison.

We will never be told the real truth.

How much have you been offered?

In structure B (e.g. The car was given to her sister), prepositions are
sometimes dropped before indirect object pronouns.

This watch was given (to) me by my father.

Explain (see 198) and suggest (see 570) cannot be used in structure A.

The problem was explained to the children. (but not The children were
explained the problem.)

A meeting place was suggested to us. (but not We were suggested a
meeting place.)

For more details of verbs with two objects, see 610.

For more about prepositional verbs in the passive, see 416.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark17>>416    passives (5): verbs with prepositions

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark18>>1    look at, listen to, pay for etc

The objects of prepositional verbs can become subjects in passive
structures. We have looked at the plan carefully. The plan has been
carefully looked at.

Nobody listens to her. She is never listened to.

Somebody has paid far your meal -> Your meal has been paid for.

Note the word order. The preposition cannot be dropped.

I don't like to be shouted at. (not hdonk-like-to-be-skettted)

For more about prepositions at the ends of clauses, see 452.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark19>>2    throw stones at, steal a bicycle from,
give flowers to etc

If there is already a direct object, the second object (after the
preposition) cannot become a passive subject.

They threw stones at him. -> Stones were thrown at him. (but not He-was
thrown stones at)

They stole a bicycle from him. -»A bicycle was stolen from him. (but not
He was stolen a bicycle from.)

They poured water on us. Water was poured on us. (but not We-were poured
water on.)

Note that possessive nouns or pronouns cannot become passive subjects,
either.

They called Mr Archer's name. -» Mr Archer's name was called. (but not
Mr Archer was name-called.)

I broke her mirror. -> Her mirror was broken, (but not She was mirror
broken.)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark20>>3    give, send etc

Verbs like give, send, lend can have two objects with no preposition
(e.g. They gave him a gold watch). For the passive of this structure
(e.g. He was given a gold watch), see 415.

For structures with have + object + past participle (e.g. We had water
poured on us), see 238, 512.3.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark21>>417    passives (6): it was thought that...

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark22>>1 clause objects: Nobody thought that she
was a spy

Some sentences have clauses as their objects. These cannot normally
become the subjects of passive sentences.

Nobody thought that she was a spy. (but not That she was-a-spy-was
thought by nobody.)

We felt that he was the right man for the job. (but not That-he-was...
was fait.)

The newspapers say that his company is in trouble. (but not That his
company is in trouble is said...)

However, passive structures are often possible with preparatory it (see
446). It was thought that she was a spy.

It was felt that he was the right man for the job.

It is said that his company is in trouble.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark23>>2 infinitive objects: They decided to ...

A few verbs that are followed by infinitives (for example decide, agree)
can also be used in passive structures beginning with it.

They decided to meet at twelve. -> It was decided to meet at twelve.

We agreed to open a new branch. -> It was agreed to open a new branch.
However, most verbs cannot be used in this way.

We hope to make a profit this year, (but not It-is hoped-to-make-...)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark24>>418 passives (7): He is believed to be ...

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark25>>1    object + infinitive: He asked me to
send...

Many verbs can be followed by object + infinitive (see 283).

He asked me to send a stamped addressed envelope.

We chose Felicity to be the Carnival Queen.

In most cases, these structures can be made passive.

I was asked to send a stamped addressed envelope.

Felicity was chosen to be the Carnival Queen.

We were told not to come back.

They are allowed to visit Harry once a week.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark26>>2    verbs of thinking, feeling and saying

With verbs like think, feel, believe, know etc, the object + infinitive
structure is rather formal and often unusual.

They believe him to be dangerous, (more normal: They believe that...)
However, the passive structure (e.g. He is believed to be...) is common,
and often occurs in news reports.

He is believed to be dangerous.

Moriarty is thought to be in Switzerland.

She is known to have been married before.

It is considered to be the finest cathedral in Scotland.

Note that with say, the infinitive structure is only possible in the
passive.

His company is said to be in trouble.

(but not They say his company-to be in trouble.)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark27>>3    hear, see, make and help

These verbs can be followed, in active structures, by object +
infinitive without to (see 281). In passive structures fo-infinitives
are used. Compare:

-    I saw him come out of the house.

He was seen to come out of the house.

-    They made him tell them everything.

He was made to tell them everything.

-    They helped him (to) get out of the country.

He was helped to get out of the country.    ►

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark28>>4    preparatory there

With some verbs (e.g. say, think, feel, report, presume, understand),
the passive structure is possible with there as a ‘preparatory subject'.

There are thought to be more than 3,000 different languages in the
world.

(= It is thought that there are...)

There was said to be disagreement between Ministers.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark29>>5    perfect, progressive and passive
infinitives

A passive verb can be followed by a perfect, progressive or passive
infinitive. He is believed to have crossed the frontier last night.

I was told to be waiting outside the station at 6 o'clock.

The hostages are expected to be released today.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark30>>6    exceptions: wanting and liking

Verbs that refer to wanting, liking and similar ideas cannot usually be
used in passive structures with following infinitives.

Everybody wanted Doris to be the manager, (but not I>oris was wanted to
be the manager.)

We like our staff to say what they think (but not Our staff are liked to
say what they think.)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark31>>419 passives (8): he was considered a genius

After some verbs the direct object can be followed by an ‘object
complement' -a noun or adjective which describes or classifies the
object.

Queen Victoria considered him a genius.

They elected Mrs Sanderson President.

We all regarded Kathy as an expert.

Most people saw him as a sort of clown.

The other children called her stupid You've made the house beautiful In
passive clauses these are subject complements; they come after the verb.
He was considered a genius by Queen Victoria.

Mrs Sanderson was elected President.

Kathy was regarded as an expert.

He was seen as a sort of clown.

She was called stupid by the other children.

The house has been made beautiful

For more about object complements, see 607.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark32>>420    passives (9): My suitcase is packed

Some verbs refer to actions that produce a finished result. Examples are
cut, build, pack, close. Other verbs do not: for example push, live,
speak, hit_{t} carry The past participles of finished-result verbs, and
some of their passive tenses, can have two meanings. They can refer to
the action, or they can describe the result (rather like adjectives).
Compare:

The theatre was closed by the police on the orders of the mayor (refers
to the action of closing)

When I got there I found that the theatre was closed.

(refers to the state of being shut - the result of the action)

Because of this, for example, present passive forms can have similar
meanings to present perfect passives.

The vegetables are all cut up - what shall I do now? (= The vegetables
have all been cut up ...)

I got caught in the rain and my suit's ruined. (=... has been ruined.)

I think your ankle is broken. (= ... has been broken.)

My suitcase is packed, (= ... has been packed.)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark33>>421    past (1): simple past (I worked etc)

This form is also called 'past simple'.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark34>>1 forms (regular verbs)

| Affirmative        | Question              | Negative                 |
| I worked           | did I work?           | I did not work           |
| you worked         | did you work?         | you did not work         |
| he/she/it worked   | did he/she/it work?   | he/she/it did not work   |
| etc                | etc                   | etc                      |

-    Contracted negatives (see 143): / didn't work, you didn't work etc.

-    Negative questions (see 368): did I not work? or didn't I work?
etc.

-    For the affirmative past forms of common irregular verbs, see 304.

-    Questions and negatives of irregular verbs are made in the same way
as those of regular verbs (with did + infinitive).

For details of question structures, see 480-486. For negatives, see
367-371.

For passive forms (e.g. Work was do tie), see 412.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark35>>2 pronunciation of -ed

The regular past ending -ed is pronounced as follows:

•    /d/ after vowels and voiced consonants (except /d/):

/5/, /b/, /v/, /z/, /3/, /d3/, /9/, /m/, /n/, /13/, IV

tried /traid/ lived /livd/ used /ju:zd/ failed /feild/

•    /t/ after unvoiced consonants (except /t/):

/0/> /P/, /f/, /s/, /J7, /tJV. /k/

stopped /stopt/ passed /parst/ laughed /larft/ watched /wDtJt/ worked
/W3:kt/    ►

• /id/ after /d/ and /t/

ended /'endid/ started /'sta:tid/

For adjectives like aged, naked, see 18.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark36>>3 spelling of regular affirmative past tense
forms

| Most regular verbs: add -ed                                                                            | work -> worked stay -> stayed show -> showed wonder -> wondered visit -> visited gallop -► galloped   |
| Verbs ending in -e: add -d                                                                             | hope -► hoped decide -> decided                                                                       |
| Verbs ending in one stressed vowel + one consonant (except w ox y): double the consonant and add -ed   | shop -► shopped plan -> planned refer -> referred re'gret -► regretted                                |
|                                                                                                        |                                                                                                       |
| But (last syllable not stressed):                                                                      | ^{1}offer -> offered *visit -► visited                                                                |
| Verbs ending in consonant + -y: change y to i and add -ed                                              | hurry -*■ hurried cry -► cried study ->• studied                                                      |
|                                                                                                        |                                                                                                       |
| But (vowel + -y):                                                                                      | play -» played                                                                                        |

Verbs ending in -c have ck in the past (e.g. picnic -► picnicked).

In British English, -/ is doubled in the past after one short vowel even
if the vowel is not stressed: 'travel -► travelled.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark37>>4 use

We use the simple past for many kinds of past events: short, quickly
finished actions and happenings, longer situations, and repeated events.

Peter broke a window last night.

I spent all my childhood in Scotland Regularly every summer, Janet fell
in love.

The simple past is common in stories and descriptions of past events.

One day the Princess decided that she didn't like staying at home all
day, so she told her father that she wanted to get a job...

The simple past is often used with words referring to finished times.

I saw John yesterday morning. He told me...

In general, the simple past tense is the ‘normal' one for talking about
the past; we use it if we do not have a special reason for using one of
the other tenses.

For the simple past with a present or future meaning (e.g. It's time you
tvent), see 426.

For special uses in subordinate clauses, see 580.

simple past with finished time expressions One day, the Princess
decided...    I saw John yesterday

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark38>>422 past (2): past progressive (I was
working etc)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark39>>1 forms

was! were + -ing

I was working.

Were you listening to me?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

She was not trying.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

For details of question structures, see 480-486. For negatives, see
367-371-For passive forms (e.g. Work was being done), see 412.

For double letters in words like sitting, stopping, see 562.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark40>>2 use: What were you doing at eight o'clock?

We use the past progressive to say that something was in progress (going
on) around a particular past time.

What were you doing at eight o'clock yesterday evening? ~ J was watching
TV. (not What did you-do . .~ I watched TV.)

When I got up this morning the sun was shining, the birds were
singing,... (not ... the sun shone, the birds sang...)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark41>>3 past progressive and simple past:
'background' events

We often use the past progressive together with a simple past tense. The
past progressive refers to a longer 'background* action or situation;
the simple past refers to a shorter acdon or event that happened in the
middle of the longer

action, or that interrupted it.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark42>>4    not used for repeated actions

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

As I was walking down the road, I saw Bill The phone rang while I was
having dinner.

Mozart died while he was composing the Requiem.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

The past progressive is not the normal tense for talking about repeated
or habitual past actions. The simple past is usually used with this
meaning.

I rang the bell six times, (not I was ringing the bell six-times.)

When I was a child we made our own amusements. (not ... we were making
our-own-amusements:)

However, the past progressive is possible if the repeated actions form a
‘background^{1} for the main action.

At the time when it happened, I was travelling to New York a lot.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark43>>5    non-progressive verbs: She said she
believed

Some verbs are not used in progressive forms (see 471).

She said she believed Joe was dying, (not She said she was believing...)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark44>>6    used for shorter, temporary actions and
situations

The past progressive, like other progressive forms (see 470), is used
for temporary actions and situations. When we talk about longer, more
permanent situations we use the simple past. Compare:

-    It happened while I was living in Eastbourne last year.

I lived in London for ten years while I was a child

-    When I got home, water was running down the kitchen walls.

When they first discovered the river, they thought it ran into the
Atlantic.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark45>>7    special uses

Because we often use the past progressive to talk about something that
is a 'background', not the main 'news', we can make something seem less
important by using this tense. Compare:

I had lunch with the President yesterday, (important piece of news)

I was having lunch with the President yesterday, and she said... (as if
there was nothing special for the speaker about lunching with the
President) The past progressive is quite often used with verbs of
saying: this gives more relative importance to the following verb - to
what is said John was saying that he still can't find a job.

With always, continually and similar words, the past progressive can be
used for things that happened repeatedly and unexpectedly or in an
unplanned way (see 472).

Aunt Lucy was always turning up without warning and bringing us
presents.

I didn't like him - he was continually borrowing money.

For the ‘distancing* use of past progressives (e.g. J was wondering
whether you'd like to come out with me this evening, see 436.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark46>>423 past perfect (1): basic information

This entry deals with the simple past perfect. For the past perfect
progressive, see 425.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    forms

had + past participle I had forgotten.

Where had she been?    It hadn't rained for weeks.

For passives (e.g. The work had been done), see 412.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    meaning and use: earlier past

The basic meaning of the past perfect is 'earlier past'. A common use is
to ‘go back' for a moment when we are already talking about the past, to
make it clear that something had already happened at the time we are
talking about. During our conversation, I realised that we had met
before, (not I reaHsed that we met before or ...-have-mefr-before.)

When 1 arrived at the party, Lucy had already gone home, (not .. .-Lucy
already-went-home. or ... has already gone home.)

The past perfect is common after past verbs of saying and thinking, to
talk about things that had happened before the saying or thinking took
place.

I told her that I had finished (not ... that 1 (have) finished.)

I wondered who had left the door open.

I thought I had sent the cheque a week before.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark49>>past perfect: we are already talking about
the past, and want to talk about an earlier past

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark50>>3    past perfect not used

The past perfect is normally only used as described above. The past
perfect is not used simply to say that something happened some time ago,
or to give a past reason for a present situation.

Alex Cary, who worked for my father in the 1980s; is now living in
Greece.

(not Alex Cary, -who-had worked for my father-...)

I left some photos to be developed. Are they ready yet? (not I-had
-left-some photos\..)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark51>>4    unreal events: if etc

After if {see 259), wish (see 630) and would rather (see 491), the past
perfect can be used to talk about past events that did not happen.

If I had gone to university I would have studied medicine.

I wish you had told me the truth.

I'd rather she had asked me before borrowing the car.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark52>>5    how long? past perfect, not simple
past.

We use a past perfect, not a simple past, to say how long something had
continued up to a past moment. A simple past perfect is used with
'nonprogressive verbs' like be, have and know.

She told me that her father had been ill since Christmas, (not ... that
her father was ill since Christmas.)

I was sorry to sell my car. I had had it since College, (not ... / had
it since College:)

When they got married, they had known each other for 15 years, (not ...
they knew eaeh-other for 15 years.)

With most other verbs, we use the past perfect progressive for this
meaning (see 425).

For the difference between since and for, see 208.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark53>>424 past perfect (2): advanced points

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark54>>1 past perfect or simple past with after, as
soon as, etc

We can use time conjunctions (e.g. after, as soon as, when, once) to
talk about two actions or events that happened one after the other.
Usually the past perfect is not necessary in these cases, because we are
not 'going back' from the time that we are mainly talking about, but
simply moving forward from one event to the next.

After it got dark, we came back inside.

As soon as Jane arrived, we sat down to eat Once it stopped raining, we
started the game again However, we can use the past perfect with after,
as soon as etc to emphasise that the first action is separate,
independent of the second, completed before the second started

She didn't feel the same after her dog had died.

As soon as he had finished his exams, he went to Paris for a month.

This use of the past perfect is especially common with when. {When has
several meanings, so we often have to show the exact time relations by
the verb form.) Compare:

-    When I had opened the windows, I sat down and had a cup of tea.

(not When I opened the unndowsHsatdown...: the first action was quite
separate from the second.)

When I opened the window, the cat jumped out. (More natural than When I
had opened the window,...: one action caused the other.)

-    When I had written my letters, I did some gardening: (not When I
wrote my

letters, I did some gardening.)

When I wrote to her, she came at once.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    unrealised hopes and wishes; things
that did not happen

The past perfect can be used to express an unrealised hope, wish etc.
Had is usually stressed in thfc case.

I HAD hoped we would leave tomorrow, but it won't be possible.

He HAD intended to make a cake, but he ran out of time.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark56>>3    past perfect with It was the
first/second... that...

We use a past perfect after it was the first/second... that... and
similar structures (see 591).

It was the first time that I had heard her sing, (not ... that I
heard...)

It was the fifth time she had asked the same question, (not ..
.she-askedr...) It was only the second opera I had seen in my life. (not
.. .-Haw-...)

For the past perfect with before (e.g. He ivent out before I had
finished my sentence), see 97.3.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark57>>425 past perfect (3): progressive

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark58>>1    forms: had been + -ing

I had been working.    Where had she been staying?

They hadn't been listening.

For double tetters in words like sitting, stopping, see 562.

2    use We use the past perfect progressive to talk about actions or
situations which had continued up to the past moment that we are
thinking about, or shortly before it.

At that time we had been living in the caravan for about six months.

When I found Mary, I could see that she had been crying.

I went to the doctor because I had been sleeping badly.    ►

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark59>>3    how long? past perfect progressive, not
past progressive

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

past perfect progressive: actions or situations which had continued up
to the past moment that we are thinking about, or shortly before it

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

We use a past perfect progressive, not a past progressive, to say how
long something had been happening up to a past moment.

We'd been walking since sunrise, and we were hungry, (not We-were
walking since sunrise...)

When she arrived, she had been travelling for twenty hours, (not ... she
was travelling-...)

For the difference between since and for, see 208.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark60>>4    progressive and simple: differences

Progressive forms are mostly used to talk about more temporary actions
and situations. When we talk about longer-lasting or permanent
situations we prefer simple forms. Compare:

My legs were stiff because 1 had been standing still for a long time.

The tree that blew down had stood there for 300 years.

Progressive forms generally emphasise the continuation of an activity;
we use simple tenses to emphasise the idea of completion. Compare:

I had been reading science fiction, and my mind was full of strange
images. I had read all my magazines, and was beginning to get bored Some
verbs are not normally used in progressive forms (see 471), even if the
meaning is one for which a progressive form would be more suitable.

I hadn't known her for very long when we got married (not / hadn't been
knowing her...)

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark61>>426 past verb form with present or future
meaning

A past tense does not always have a past meaning. In some kinds of
sentence we can use verbs like I had, you went or I was wondering to
talk about the present or future.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark62>>1    after conjunctions, instead of would

In most subordinate clauses (e.g. after if, supposing, wherever, what),
we use past tenses (and not would...) to express ‘unreal' or conditional
ideas (see 580.6).

If I had the money now I'd buy a car.

If you caught the ten o'clock train tomorrow you would be in Edinburgh
by supper-time, unless the train was delayed of course.

You look as if you were just about to scream.

Supposing we didn't go on holiday next year?

Would you follow me wherever I went?

In a perfect world, you would be able to say exactly what you thought
Ten o'clock - its time (that) you went home.

Don't come and see me today - I'd rather (that) you came tomorrow.

I wish (that) I had a better memory:

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark63>>2    distancing in questions, requests etc

We can make questions, requests and offers less direct (and so more
polite) by using past tenses. (For more about ‘distancing' of this kind,
see 436.) Common formulae are I wondered, I thought / hoped, did you
want I wondered if you were free this evening.

I thought you might like some flowers.

Did you want cream with your coffee, sir?

Past progressive forms (I was thinking/ wondering!hoping etc) make
sentences even less direct.

I was thinking about that idea of yours.

I was hoping we could have dinner together.

<<main-26.xhtml#bookmark64>>3    'past' modals

The ‘past' modal forms could, might, would and should usually have
present or future reference; they are used as less direct, 'distanced*
forms of can, may, unll and shalL

Could you help me for a moment? Would you come this way, please?

I think it might rain soon    Alice should be here soon.

<<main-27.xhtml>>

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark0>>4    past focus on continuing situations

If we are talking about the past, we usually use past tenses even for
things which are still true and situations which still exist.

Are you deaf? I asked how old you were.

I'm sorry we left Liverpool. It was such a nice place.

Do you remember that nice couple we met on holiday? They were German,
weren't they?

I got this job because I was a good driven

Bill applied to join the police last week, but he wasn't tall enough.

For more indirect speech examples, see 275, 278.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark1>>427    perfect verb forms

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark2>>1    construction

Perfect verb forms are made with have + past participle.

She has lost her memory, (present perfect)

They have been living in France for the last year, (present perfect
progressive)

I told him that I had never heard of the place, (past perfect)

When I went back to the village the house had been pulled down.

(past perfect passive)

We will have finished by tomorrow afternoon. (future perfect tense)

I'm sorry to have disturbed you. (perfect infinitive)

Having seen the film, I don't want to read the book, (perfect -ing form)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark3>>2    terminology and use

A perfect verb form generally shows the time of an event as being
earlier than some other time (past, present or future). But a perfect
form does not only show the time of an event. It also shows how the
speaker sees the event -perhaps as being connected to a later event, or
as being completed by a certain time. Because of this, grammars often
talk about 'perfect aspect' rather than 'perfect tenses*.

For details of the use of the various perfect verb forms, see the
individual entries in the book.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark4>>428    personal pronouns (1): basic
information

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark5>>1    terminology and use

The words I, me, you, he, him, she, her, it, we, us, they and them are
usually called 'personal pronouns*. (This is a misleading name: it, they
and them refer to things as well as people.)

Personal pronouns are used when more exact noun phrases are not
necessary. Vm tired. (/ replaces the name of any speaker.)

John's ill. He'll be away for a few days, (not .. -John-ll-be away...)

Tell Mary I miss her. (not Tell Mary I miss Mary.)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark6>>2    subject and object forms: / and me, he
and him etc

Personal pronouns (except you) have one form when they are used as
subjects, and a different form for other uses - for example, when they
are the objects of verbs or prepositions.

Subject I he she Object: me him her Compare:

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

we they us them

- We sent her some flowers. She sent us some flowers.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

- I like dogs.

Dogs don't like me.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark7>>3    other uses of object forms: It was her

Me, him, her, us and them are used not only as objects, but also as
complements after be, and in short answers, especially in an informal
style. Who said that? --- (It was) her.

Who's there? ~Me.

In a more formal style, we use subject form + verb where possible.

Who said that? ~She did. (but not She:)

It is possible to use a subject form alone after be (e.g. It is I; It
was he), but this is extremely formal, and is usually considered
over-correct.

Object forms are also common in double subjects in informal speech.

John and me are going skiing this weekend.

This is considered incorrect in more formal usage (see 429.1).

For sentences like It's me that needs help, see 429.3.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark8>>4    Personal pronouns cannot be left out

We cannot normally leave out personal pronouns, even if the meaning is
clear without them (for some exceptions, see 429.11).

It's raining. (not Is raining.)

She loved the picture because it reminded her of home, (not ... because
reminded her of home.)

They arrested Alex and put him in prison. (not ... and put to prison?)
Have some chocolate. *No, I don't like it (not ... I-don't-Hke:)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark9>>5    One subject is enough

One subject is enough. We do not usually use a personal pronoun to
repeat a subject that comes in the same clause.

My car is parked outside. (not My-car-iHs-parkedr-outside.)

The boss really gets on my nerves, (not The-boss-he really gets on my
nerves.) The situation is terrible, (not It is terrible the situation.)

There are exceptions in very informal speech (see 514).

He's not a bad bloke, Jeff.

It's a horrible place, London.

For it as a preparatory subject or object, see 446-447.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark10>>6    personal and relative pronouns: she or
who, not both

We do not use personal pronouns to repeat the meaning of relative
pronouns (see 494.7).

That's the girl who lives in the flat upstairs. (not .. -whoshe-hwes...)
Here's the money (that) you lent me. (not ... (that) you lent me it)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark11>>7    it referring to nothing, the situation,
etc.

It not only refers to the names of particular things. We can also use it
to refer to indefinite pronouns like nothing, anything, everything.

Nothing happened did it?

Everythings all right, isn't it?    »

It can also refer to a whole fact, event or situation.

Our passports were stolen. It completely ruined our holiday.

I did all I could, but it wasn't enough.

It's terrible - everybody's got colds, and the central heating isn't
working. Wasn't it lovely there!

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark12>>8    it as 'empty' subject: it's ten o'clock

We use it as a meaningless subject with expressions that refer to time,
weather, temperature or distances.

It's ten o'clock, (not Is ten o'-clock.) It's Monday again.

It rained for three days.    It's thirty degrees.

It's ten miles to the nearest petrol station.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark13>>9    it used to identify

We use it for a person when we are identifying him or her.

Who's that over there? It's John Cook (not He^{L}s-Jokn Cook)

Is that our waiter? ~No, it isn't, (not No-, he isn'-i.)

On the phone: Hello. It's Alan Williams, (not ... f'm -Akm-WHHam*-)

It's your sister who plays the piano, isn't it?

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark14>>10 we women, you men

We and plural you (but not other personal pronouns) can be put directly
before nouns.

We women know things that you men will never understand (but not I woman
know... or They men will never ...)

For you used for people in general, see 396.

For the personal pronoun one, see 396.

For the use of he and she to refer to animals, ships etc, see 222.

For they, them, their with singular reference, see 528.

For the interrogative personal pronoun who(m), see 623.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark15>>429 personal pronouns (2): advanced points

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark16>>1 John and me went, us women understand;
between you and I

We often use object forms in double subjects in informal speech.

John and me are going skiing this weekend.

Me and the kids spent Sunday at the swimming pool Us is sometimes used
as a subject together with a noun.

Us women understand these things better than you men.

And I is often used informally in double objects.

Between you and I, I think his marriage is in trouble.

That's a matter for Peter and I.

I often think of the old days and how you helped Bertie and I. (letter
from Queen Elizabeth, wife of the future King George VI, to King Edward
VIII). These structures are often condemned as 'incorrect', but they
have been common in educated speech for centuries. (There are examples
of me in double subjects in Jane Austen's novels, written around 1800.)
They are, however, restricted to a very informal style. They are not
correct in formal speech or writing.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark17>>2    as, than, but and except + me or /

After as and than, object forms are generally used in an informal style.

My sister's nearly as tall as me.

I can run faster than her.

In a more formal style, subject forms are used, usually followed by
verbs.

My sister's nearly as tall as I am.

I can run faster than she can.

But (meaning 'except') and except are followed by object forms (see 116,
194). Nobody but me knew the answer. (not Nobody buH..)

Everybody except him can come.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark18>>3    It is/was me that ...II who ...

When a relative clause comes after an expression like It is/was mell,
there are two possibilities:

object form + that (very informal)

It's me that needs your help.

It was him that told the police.

subject form + who (very formal)

It is I who need your help.

It was he who told the police.

We can avoid being too formal or too informal by using a different
structure. He was the person / the one who told the police.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark19>>4    mixed subject and object: It's for him
to decide

Sometimes a pronoun is the object of a verb or preposition, but the
subject of a following infinitive or clause. Normally an object form is
used in this case. It's for him to decide. (not It's for he to decide.)

I think it's a good idea for you and me to meet soon.

(Considered more correct than ... for you and I to meet soon.)
Everything comes to him who waits.

(Considered more correct than ... to he who waits.)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark20>>5    inclusive and exclusive we

Note that we and us can include or exclude the listener or reader.
Compare: Shall we go and have a drink? (We includes the listener.)

We're going for a drink Would you like to come with us?

(We and us exclude the listener.)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark21>>6    us meaning 'me'

In very informal British speech, us is quite often used instead of me
(especially as an indirect object).

Give us a kiss, love.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark22>>7    Poor you!

You can be modified by adjectives in a few informal expressions such as
Poor!Clever!Lucky (old) you! (This occasionally happens also with me.) »

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark23>>8    you: different singular and plural
forms

Although standard modem English uses you for both singular and plural,
separate forms exist in certain varieties of English. Some speakers in
Yorkshire use thu or tha as a singular subject form and thee as a
singular object form. Some Irish and Scottish dialects have a separate
plural form ye, youse or yiz. Many Americans (and increasingly, British
people) use you folks or you guys (to both men and women) as an informal
second-person plural.

Hi, you guys. Listen to this.

In southern US speech there is a second-person plural form you ail
(pronounced y'all), used instead of you when people wish to sound
friendly or intimate; there is also a possessive you all's (pronounced
y'all's).

Hi, everybody. Houf re you all doing? What are you alVs plans for
Thanksgiving?

For the older English forms thee and thou, see 392.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark24>>9    he/she who ...

The structure he!she who ... (meaning ‘the person who ...') is found in
older literature.

He who hesitates is sometimes lost.

But this is very unusual in modern English.

The person who leaves last should lock the door, or Whoever leaves
last... (not He/She who-ieaves-last-...)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark25>>10    politeness

It is considered polite to use names or noun phrases, rather than he,
she or they, to refer to people who are present.

Dad said I could go out. ~No, I didn't. (More polite than He said I
could go out.)

This lady needs an ambulance.

However, pronouns need to be used to avoid repetition (see 500).

Dad said he didn't mind... (not Dad-said Badrdidn't mind...)

It is considered polite to mention oneself last in double subjects or
objects. Why don't you and I go away for the weekend? (not Why don't-I
and-ymt-...?)

The invitation was for Tracy and me. (More polite than ... for me and

Tracy.)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark26>>11    leaving out personal pronouns

Personal pronouns cannot usually be left out (see 428.4).

She loved the picture because it reminded her of home, (not ... because
reminded her of home.)

However, in informal speech, subject pronouns and/or auxiliary verbs are
sometimes left out at the beginning of a sentence. For details of this,
see 179. Can't help you. I'm afraid. (= I can't...)

Seen Paul? (= Have you seen Paul?)

We seldom put it after know. See 313 for details.

It's getting late. I know. (not / know it.)

After certain verbs (e.g. believe, think, suppose), we use so rather
than it. (For details, see 539.)

Is that the manager? ~/ believe so. (not ... I believe (it).)

And personal pronouns can be dropped after prepositions in descriptive
structures with have and with.

All the trees have got blossom on (them).

He was carrying a box with cups in (it).

Object pronouns are not normally used in infinitive clauses if the
object of the infinitive has just been mentioned (see 284.4).

She's easy to please, (not She's-easy-to- please her.)

The pie looked too nice to eat. (not ... too nice ■to-eat-it:)

The bridge wasn't strong enough to drive over, (not ... to drive over
it.) This dish takes two hours to prepare.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark27>>430 piece- and group-words

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark28>>1    uncountable nouns: pieces

To talk about a limited quantity of something we can use a word for a
piece or unit, together with of, before an uncountable noun. The most
general words of this kind are piece and bit. Bit (informal) suggests a
small quantity. a piece/bit of cake/bread some pieces/bits of paper/wood
a piece/bit of news/information Other words are less general, and are
used before particular nouns. Some common examples: a bar of
chocolatefsoap    a loaf of bread

a blade of grass    a lump of sugar!coal

a block of ice    a slice of breadlcakelmeat

a drop of waterloillvinegar    a speck of dust

a grain of sandlsaltlricelcorrUtruth    a sheet of paper/metal/plastic

an item of information/news/clothing/ a stick of dynamitefchalk/celery
furniture    a strip of clothJtapefland

a length of material    a suit of clothes/armour

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark29>>2    not a... of...

Some words for small pieces can be used in a negative structure meaning
‘no ... at all*.

There's not a grain of truth in what he says.

There hasn't been a breath of air all day.

We haven't got a scrap (of food) to eat.

He came downstairs without a stitch of clothing on.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark30>>3    pairs

Pair is used for many things that normally go in twos, and with plural
nouns that refer to some two-part objects (see 524.7). a pair of
shoestsocks/ear-rings a pair of glasses/binoculars a pair of
trousers/jeans/pyjamas

a pair of scissors/pliers    ►

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark31>>4 plural nouns: collections

Special words are used before certain plural nouns to talk about groups
or collections.

a bunch of flowers a crowd of people a flock of sheep/birds a herd of
cattlefgoats a pack of cards (AmE a deck of cards)

Set is used before many uncountable and plural nouns referring to groups
which contain a fixed number of things.

a set ofcutlerylnapkinsfdishes/tyresfsparking plugs/spanners

For a bit as a modifier before adjectives and adverbs, see 107.

For an amount, a lot, a large number etc, see 333.

For sort, type, kind etc, see 551.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark32>>431    place: a place to live, etc

In an informal style, place can often be followed direcdy by an
infinitive or relative clause, with no preposition or relative word.

I'm looking for a place to live. (More formal:... a place to live in or
... a place in which to live.)

There's no place to sit down.

You remember the place we had lunch? (= ... the place (that) we had
lunch at? or ... the place where we had lunch?)

We do not use a place where before an infinitive.

I'm looking for a place (where) I can wash my clothes, (not ... a place
where to wash my clothes;)

‘Go places* (informal) means 'become very successful in life'.

That boy's going to go places, believe me.

For similar structures with way, time and reason, see 498.6.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark33>>432    play and game

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark34>>1    nouns

A play is a piece of dramatic literature for the theatre, radio or
television.

Julius Caesar' is one of Shakespeare's early plays.

A game is an activity like, for example, chess, football or bridge.

Chess is a very slow game. (not .. . a very slow play.)

The uncountable noun play can be used to mean 'playing* in general.
Children learn a great deal through play.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark35>>2    verbs

People act in plays or films, and play games or musical instruments.

My daughter is acting in her school play this year.

Have you ever played rugby football?

Play can be used with the same meaning as act before the name of a
character in a play or film.

fll never forget seeing Olivier play Othello.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark36>>433 please and thank you

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark37>>1    requests

We use please to make requests more polite.

Could I have some more rice, please?

Would you like some help? Yes, please.

Note that please does not change an order into a request. Compare:

Stand over there, (order)

Please stand over there, (more polite order)

Could you stand over there, please? (polite request)

Please do is a rather formal answer to a request for permission.

Do you mind if I open the window? ~ Please do

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    when please is not used

We do not use please to ask people what they have said.

I've got a bit of a headache. ~ J beg your pardon?

(not ... Please?)

We do not use please when we give things to people.

Have you got a pen I could use? ~ Yes, here you are.

(not ... Please.)

Please is not used as an answer to Thank you (see below).

Thanks a lot ~ That's OK. (not ... Please:)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    thank you and thanks

Thanks is more informal than thank you. Common expressions:

Thank you. (not Tfianks you)

Thank you very much Thanks very much.

Thanks a lot. (but not Thank you a lot.)

Thank God it's Friday, (not Thanks God...)

Indeed (see 273) can be used to strengthen very much.

Thank you very much indeed (but not usually Thank you indeed.)

Thank you for / Thanks for can be followed by an -ing form. Possessives
are unnecessary and are not used.

Thank you for coming. ~Not at all Thank you for having me. (not Thank
you for your coming.)

Some people say Cheers to mean Thanks.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark40>>4    accepting and refusing

We often use Thank you / Thanks like Yes, please, to accept offers.

Would you like some potatoes? ~ Thank you. ~How many?

To make it clear that one wishes to refuse something, it is normal to
say No, thank you i No, thanks.

Another cake? ~No, thanks. Vve eaten too many already.

Yes, thanks is most often used to confirm that things are all right.

Have you got enough potatoes? Yes, thanks.    ►

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark41>>5 replies to thanks

In English, there is not an automatic answer to Thank you; British
people, especially, do not usually answer when they are thanked for
small things. If a reply is necessary, we can say Not at all (rather
formal), You're welcome, That's (quite) all right or That's OK
(informal). Some people say No problem (informal). Compare:

Could you pass the salt? ~Here you are. ~ Thanks. ~ (no answer)

Here's your coat. ~ Thanks. ~ (no answer)

Thanks so much for looking after the children. ~ That's all right Any
time. (answer necessary)

For more about the language of common social situations, see 545.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark42>>434    point of view

Point of view can mean the same as opinion.

Thank you for giving us your point of view / opinion.

But from somebody's point of view is not quite the same as in somebody's
viewf opinion. It usually means 'as seen from somebody's position in
life' (for example as a student, a woman, a Greek or a Catholic), and is
used to say how somebody is affected by what happens. Compare:

-    In my opinion, war is always wrong. (= I think war ...)

(not From my point of view, war is always wrong.)

He wrote about the war from the point of view of the ordinary soldier.

-    In my view, it's a pretty good school

You have to judge a school from the child's point of view.

-    In Professor Lucas's opinion, everybody should work a 20-hour week.

From the employers' point of view, this would cause a lot of problems.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark43>>435    politeness (1): using questions

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark44>>1    requests: Could you ... ?

We usually ask people to do things for us by making yeslno questions.
(This suggests that the hearer can choose whether to agree or not.)

Could you tell me the time, please? (much more polite than Please tell
me the time.)

Some other typical structures used in requests:

Could you possibly tell me the way to the station? (very polite)

Would you mind switching on the TV?

Would you like to help me for a few minutes?

You couldn't lend me some money, could you? (informal)

Indirect yes/no questions are also used in polite requests.

I wonder if you could (possibly) help me for a few minutes.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark45>>2    other structures: telling people to do
things

If we use other structures (for example imperatives, should, had
better), we are not asking people to do things, but telling or advising
them to do things. These structures can therefore seem rude if we use
them in requests, especially in

conversation with strangers or people we do not know well. Please makes
an order or instruction a little more polite, but does not tum it into a
request. The following structures can be used perfectly correctly to
give orders, instructions or advice, but they are not polite ways of
requesting people to do things. Please answer by return of post. You
ought to tell me your plans. Please help me for a few minutes. You
should shut the door.

Help me, would you?    You had better help me.

Carry this for me, please.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark46>>3    shops, restaurants etc

Requests in shops, restaurants etc are usually more direct, and are not
always expressed as questions. Typical structures:

Can I have one of those, please?    I'd like to see the wine list,
please.

Could I have a look at the red ones? I would prefer a small one.

Give meplease and I want..please are not normally considered polite. But
in places where only a few kinds of thing are sold and not much needs to
be said, it is enough just to say what is wanted and add please.

The Times', please. Two cheeseburgers, please.

Black coffee, please. Return to Lancaster, please.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark47>>4    negative questions

Negative questions (see 368) are not used in polite requests.

Could you give me a light? (not Couldn't you give me a light? - this
sounds like a complaint?)

But negative statements with question tags are used in informal
requests. You couldn't give me a light, could you?

I don't suppose you could give me a light, could you? (very polite)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark48>>5    expressions of opinion

Expressions of opinion can also be made less direct by turning them into
questions. Compare:

It would be better to paint it green. (direct expression of opinion)
Wouldn't it be better to paint it green? (less direct: negative question
asking for agreement)

Would it be better to paint it green? (open question - very indirect)

For other rules of ‘social language', see 545.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark49>>436 politeness (2): distancing verb forms

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark50>>1 past tenses: How much did you want to
spend?

We can make requests (and also questions, suggestions and statements)
less direct (and so more polite) by using verb forms that suggest
‘distance* from the immediate present reality. Past tenses are often
used to do this.

How much did you want to spend, sir? (meaning ‘How much do you want to
spend?*)

How many days did you intend to stay? (meaning \.. do you intend ...')

I wondered if you were free this evening.    ►

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark51>>2    progressives: I'm hoping ...

Progressive forms can be used in the same way. They sound more casual
and less definite than simple forms, because they suggest something
temporary and incomplete.

Vm hoping you can lend me £10. (less definite than I hope...)

What time are you planning to arrive? (more casual-sounding than Please
let us know what time you plan to arrive.)

Vm looking forward to seeing you again, (more casual than I look
forward...)

Vm afraid we must be going.

Past progressives give two levels of distancing.

Good morning. I was wondering: have you got two single rooms?

Were you looking for anything special? (in a shop)

I was thinking - what about borrowing Jake's car?

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark52>>3    future: You'll need to ...

Another way to distance something is to displace it into the future.
Will need/ have to can be used to soften instructions and orders.

Vm afraid you'll need to fill in this form.

I'll have to ask you to wait a minute.

And will is sometimes used to say how much money is owed.

That will be £1.65, please.

Future progressive verbs are often used to enquire politely about
people's plans (see 220).

Will you be going away at the weekend?

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark53>>4    modal verbs: would, could and might

The modal verbs would, could and might also make questions, requests and
suggestions less direct.

I thought it would be nice to have a picnic.

Hi! I thought I'd come over and introduce myself My name's Andy.

Could you give me a hand?

Could I ask you to translate this for me?

We could ask Peter to help us.

I was wondering if you might be interested in a game of tennis.

I came in and ordered some shoes from you. - Oh yes, sir. When would
that have been, exactly?

Would is very often used to form requests and offers with verbs like
like and prefer.

What would you like to drink?

Note the common use of would before verbs of saying and thinking, to
make a statement sound less definite.

I would say we'd do better to catch the earlier train.

This is what I would call annoying.

I would think we might stop for lunch soon.

I'm surprised you didn't like the film. I would have thought it was just
your kind of thing.

We would ask passengers to have their tickets ready for inspection

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark54>>5 conditional and negative expressions

Another way of distancing suggestions from reality is to make them
conditional or negative.

It would be better if we turned it the other way up.

What if we stayed at home for a change?

Suppose I gave Alice a call?

If you would come this way...

I wonder if you could lend me £5?

I don't suppose you want to buy a car, do you?

You wouldn't like to come out with us, by any chance?

You couldn't take the children to school, could you? (but not Couldn't
you take the children to school? This sounds like a complaint - see
435.4.)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark55>>437    politeness (3): softening expressions

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark56>>1    quite, maybe, I think etc

We can express our opinions and intentions less directly (and therefore
more politely) by using softening expressions like quite, rather, kind
of a bit, maybe etc.

He's quite difficult to understand, isn't he?

I find her rather bossy, don't you?    The food's a bit expensive.

This music's kind of boring.    Maybe fll go for a walk now.

For more examples, see 157.16.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark57>>2    I think I'll...

We can say that we are thinking of doing things, instead of expressing
our intentions directly.

I think I'll go to bed in a few minutes.

I'm thinking of going to London tomorrow.

Td quite like to start thinking about going home

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark58>>3    We would like to ...

In a formal style, requests, invitations, suggestions etc are often
introduced by would like instead of being expressed directly.

We would like to invite you to give a talk to our members on June 14th.

I'd like to suggest that we take a vote.

I would Uke to congratulate you on your examination results.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark59>>438    politics and policy

Politics (usually singular but always with -s - see 524.3) is used to
talk about government and related ideas.

I don't know much about politics, but I don't think this is a democracy.

You talk beautifully - you should be in politics.    ».

Policy is used for people's rules of behaviour (not necessarily
connected with politics).

After the war, British foreign policy was rather confused, (not ..
.-British foreign politics-...)

It's not my policy to believe everything I hear.

It's the firm's policy to employ a certain number of handicapped people.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark60>>439 possessives (1): noun + 's (forms)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark61>>1    spelling

singular noun + 's my father's car plural noun + ' my parents' house

irregular plural + 's the children's room, men's clothes, women's
rights,

an old people's home

We sometimes just add an apostrophe (') to a singular noun ending in -s,
especially in literary and classical references.

Socrates' ideas. Dickens's novels But 's is more common.

Mr Lewis's dog We can add's or ' to a whole phrase. the man next door's
wife Henry the Eighth's six wives the Smiths' new house Note the
difference between, for example:

Joe and Ann's children (one lot of children: Joe and Ann are their
parents) Joe's and Ann's children (two separate lots of children: Joe's
and Ann's)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark62>>2    pronunciation

The ending 's is pronounced just like a plural ending (see 525).
doctor's /‘dDktaz/    Madge's /'maed3iz/

dog's /dDgz/    Alice's /'aelisiz/

president's /'prezidants/ James's /'d3eimziz/ Jack's /d3aeks/

The apostrophe in a word like parents' does not change the pronunciation
at all. But with singular classical (ancient Greek and Roman) names
ending in s', we often pronounce a possessive *s even when it is not
written.

Socrates' /'Jnkratiiziz / ideas.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark63>>3    possessive's and other determiners

A noun cannot normally have an article or other determiner with it as
well as a possessive word (see 154). Definite articles are usually
dropped when possessives are used.

the car that is John's (= John's car) (not the-John's-car or John's
the-car) But a possessive word may of course have its own article.

the car that is the boss's (= the boss's car)

When we want to use a noun with a!an or this! that etc as well as a
possessive, we usually use the * of mine' construction (see 443).

She's a cousin of John's. (not ... a John's-cousin.)

I saw that stupid boyfriend of Angie's yesterday, (not .. .-that
Angie-sstupid boyfriend...)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark64>>4 possessive without a noun

We can use a possessive without a following noun, if the meaning is
clear.

Whose is that? \^Peter's.

We often talk about shops, firms, churches and people's houses in this
way. The apostrophe is often dropped in the names of shops and firms.

I bought it at Smiths. She got married at St Joseph's.

We had a nice time at John and Susan's last night In modem English,
expressions like the doctor, the dentist_{t} the hairdresser, the
butcher are often used without's.

Alice is at the hairdresserCs).

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark65>>440 possessives (2): noun + 's (use)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark66>>1    meanings of the's structure

We use the ‘s structure most often to talk about possessions,
relationships and physical characteristics, especially when the first
noun refers to a person or animal, or to a country, organisation or
other group of living creatures.

That's my father's house, (not ... the house-of-tny-father)

Mary's brother is a lawyer. (not The brother of Mary...)

I don't like Alice's friends much.    Pete's eyes are like yours.

There's something wrong with the cat's ear.

Scotland's climate is getting warmer.

What do you think of the company's management?

We also use the structure to talk about things that people etc produce.

I didn't believe the girl's story.    Have you read John's letter?

What are Norway's main exports?

The government's decision was extremely unwise.

With some words for people's actions, we can use either's or a structure
with of.

the Queen's arrival or the arrival of the Queen

the committee's second meeting or the second meeting of the committee An
o/-structure is preferred when the ‘possessing' expression is very long.
Compare:

My sister's husband.

The husband of the woman who sent you that strange letter.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark67>>2    '5 not used: the name of the street

With nouns which are not the names of people, animals, countries etc, 's
is less common, and a structure with a preposition (usually of) is more
normal. the name of the street (not the street's name) the back of the
room (not the room's back) the roof of the house (not the house's roof)

the top of the page (not the page's-top)    ►

However, both structures are possible in some expressions. the earth's
gravity or the gravity of the earth the plan's importance or the
importance of the plan the concerto's final movement or the final
movement of the concerto the train's arrival or the arrival of the train
the world's oldest mountains or the oldest mountains in the world (not.
.. of the world) - see 139.7 Unfortunately, it is not possible to give
useful general rules in this area: the choice of structure often depends
on the particular expression.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark68>>3    subject

Note that the's structure often corresponds to a sentence in which the
first noun is the subject of have or some other verb.

Joe's brother (Joe has a brother) the dog's tail (the dog has a tail)

America's gold reserves (America has gold reserves) the manager's
decision (the manager made a decision)

Harris's novel (Harris wrote a novel)

In a few cases, the first noun may correspond to the object of a verb.
the prisoner's release (they released the prisoner)

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark69>>4    measurement of time: a day's journey

The 's structure (or the plural with s') is often used to say how long
things last.

a day's journey twenty minutes' delay Noun + noun structures are also
possible in expressions with numbers (see 386.5).

a three-hour journey a twenty-minute delay

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark70>>5    other expressions of time: yesterday's
news

We can also use the's structure to talk about particular moments and
events. yesterday's news last Sunday's match tomorrow's weather

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark71>>6    worth

Note the use of the's structure before worth.

a pound's worth of walnuts three dollars' worth of popcorn

For the's structure in compound nouns (e.g. a doll's house, cow's milk),
see 386.

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark72>>441 possessives (3): my, your etc

<<main-27.xhtml#bookmark73>>1 What kind of words are they?

My, your_{t} his, her_{t} its, our and their are determiners (see 154),
and are used at the beginning of noun phrases.

my younger brother your phone number their plans They are also pronouns,
because they stand for possessive noun phrases: my younger brother means
‘the speaker's younger brother*; their plans means, for example, ‘those
people's plans' or ‘the children's plans'.

They are not adjectives (although they are sometimes called 'possessive
adjectives' in older grammars and dictionaries).

<<main-28.xhtml>>

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    one's and whose

One's (see 396.5) and whose (see 496; 626) are also possessive
determiners/ pronouns.

It's easy to lose one's temper when one is criticised.

An orphan is a child whose parents are dead.

Whose bicycle is that?

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    not used with other determiners

My, your etc are not used with other determiners like the, alan or this.

She's lost her keys, (not ... the -her-keys.)

If we want to use a/an or this, that etc with a possessive, we use the
‘...of mine' structure (see 443).

A friend of mine has just invited me to Italy, (not A my friend...)

How's that brother of yours? (not ... that your brother?)

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark2>>4    distributive use: She told them to open
their books, etc

After a plural possessive, we do not normally use a singular noun in the
sense of ‘one each'. (For details, see 530.)

The teacher told the children to open their books, (not ... their book)

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark3>>5    articles instead of possessives

We sometimes use articles instead of my, your etc. This happens in
prepositional phrases which refer to the subject or object, mostly when
we are talking about blows, pains and other things that often happen to
parts of people's bodies.

The ball hit him on the head.

She's got a pain in the stomach.

In other cases we do not normally use articles instead of possessives.

She's got a parrot on her shoulder. (not She's got a parrot on the
shoulder.) Katy broke her arm mountain climbing, (not Katy broke the arm
...)

He stood there, his eyes closed and his hands in his pockets, looking
half asleep, (not ... the eyes closed and the haruh-in the -pockets-...)

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark4>>6    spelling: its, whose

The possessives its and whose have no apostrophes. It's and who's are
not possessives, but conttactions (see 143): they mean ‘it is* or ‘it
has*; ‘who is* or 'who has*. Compare:

The dog's in a good mood It's just had its breakfast.

Whose little girl is that? ~ You mean the one who*s making all that
noise?

For structures like Do you mind my smoking?, see 295.3.

For my own, your own etc, see 405.

For the older English form thy, see 392.

For southern AmE you all's, see 429.8.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark5>>442 possessives (4): mine, yours etc

Mine, yours_{t} his, hers, ours and theirs are similar to my, your etc,
but they are not determiners, and are used without following nouns.    ►

Compare:

That's my coat. That coat is mine.

Which is your car? Which car is yours?

Whose can be used with a following noun (see 441) or without.

Whose car is that? Whose is that car?

We do not use articles with mine etc.

Can I borrow your keys? 1 can't find mine, (not / can't find the mine.)
One's cannot be used without a following noun; instead, we use one's
own.

It's nice to have a room of one's own. (not ... of one's.)

Its is not normally used without a following noun.

I've had my breakfast, and the dogs had its breakfast too. (not ...
and-the dogs-hadrksz)

For the older English form thine, see 392.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark6>>443    possessives (5): a friend of mine etc

We cannot usually put a possessive between another determiner and a
noun. We can say my friend, Ann's friend, a friend or that friend, but
not a my friend or that Ann's friend. Instead, we use a structure with
o/+ possessive.

determiner + noun + of + possessive

That policeman is a friend of mine. He's a cousin of the Queen's.

How's that brother of yours?    She's a friend of my father's.

I met another boyfriend of Lucy's yesterday.

Have you heard this new idea of the boss's?

He watched each gesture of hers as if she was a stranger.

My work is no business of yours.

The structure has a variant in which a noun does not have possessive V.
this is sometimes used when talking about relationships.

He's a cousin of the Queen.    She's a friend of my father.

The word own is used in a similar structure (see 405).

I wish I had a room of my own.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark7>>444    prefer

When we say that we prefer one activity to another, two -ing forms can
be used. The second can be introduced by to or rather than (more
formal).

I prefer riding to walking; (not I prefer riding to walk)

She prefers making toys for her children rather than buying them.

Prefer can also be followed by an infinitive (this is normal after would
prefer). We can use an infinitive (without to) or an -ing form after
rather than in this case.

She prefers to make toys for her children rather than buy/buying them.

I would prefer to stay at home rather than drivefdriving to your
mother's.

For more about to with -ing forms, see 298.2.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark8>>445 prefixes and suffixes

The following are some of the most common and useful English prefixes
and

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

suffixes.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="3">
#+END_HTML

1 prefixes

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

prefix

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mainly added to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

usual meaning

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

a-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

not, without

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Anglo-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

English

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ante-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

before

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

anti-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

against

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

arch-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

supreme, most

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

auto-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

self

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

bi-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

two

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

cent(i)-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

hundredth

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

co-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

together (with)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

counter-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

against

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

cyber-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

computer,

internet

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

de-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

reversing action

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

take away

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

dis-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

not, opposite

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

reversing action

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

e-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

electronic,

internet

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

eco-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

environment

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

en-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

put in

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

make

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Euro-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

European

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ex-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

former

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

extra-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

exceptionally

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

outside

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

fore-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

before

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

geo-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

earth

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

hyper-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

extreme(ly)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ill-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

past participles

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

badly

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

in-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

not, opposite

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

(im- before p)

(il- before 1)

(ir- before r) inter-    adj., verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

examples

amoral asexual Anglo-American antenatal antedate anteroom

antisocial, anti-war archbishop, arch-enemy automatic, autobiography
bilingual, bicycle centimetre, centilitre co-operate, co-pilot
counteract

counter-revolution (ary) cybercrime, cyberculture

defrost, deregulate deforest

disloyal disappear disorder

disconnect, disinfect email, e-commerce, e-book eco-friendly,
eco-tourism endanger, encircle enrich, enable Eurocentric, Europop
ex-husband extra-special extra-terrestrial foretell foreknowledge
geothermal geophysics hypercritical hypertension ill-advised,
ill-expressed incomplete, insensitive impossible illegible irregular
international intermarry    +

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

between,

among

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

prefix

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mainly added to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

usual meaning

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

examples

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

kilo-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

thousand

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

kilometre, kilogram

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mal-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

bad(ly)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

maltreat, malformed malfunction

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mega-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

million

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

megabyte

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj. (informal)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

extremely

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mega-rich

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

micro-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj._{y} nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

very small

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

microlight (aircraft), micrometer

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mid-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

in the middle of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mid-December_{t} mid-afternoon

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

milli-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

thousandth

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

millisecond

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mini-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

little

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

miniskirt, minicab

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mis-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

wrong(ly)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

misunderstand, misconduct

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mono-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

one

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

monogamous, monorail

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

multi-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

many

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

multilingual,

multi-purpose

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

neo-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

new(ly)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

neo-classical, neo-Nazi

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

non-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns, adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

not

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

non-smoker,

non-returnable

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

omni-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

all

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

omnipresent

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

out-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

do/be more than

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

outrun, outnumber (vb.)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

over-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

too much

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

over-confident, overeat

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

_{P}an-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

right across

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

pan-American

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

photo-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

light

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

photoelectric, photosynthesis

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

poly-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

many

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

polyglot, polygon

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

post-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

after

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

post-modern, postwar

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

pre-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

before

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

premarital prewar

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

pro-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

for, in favour of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

pro-communist, pro-government (adj.)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

pseudo-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

false

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

pseudo-academic

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

psycho-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mind, mental

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

psycho-analysis

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

re-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs, nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

again, back

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

rebuild, reconstruction

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

semi-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td rowspan="2">
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

half

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

semi-conscious,

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

semicircle

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

socio-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

society

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

socio-economic

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

sub-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td rowspan="2">
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

below

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

sub-standard,

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

subconscious, subway

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

super*

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj. nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

more than, special

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

supernatural,

supermarket

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

tele-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

distant

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

telescope

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

thermo-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

heat

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

thermo-electric, thermometer

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

trans-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

across

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

transatlantic, transplant

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

tri-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

three

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

tripartite, triangle

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

prefix

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

mainly added to usual meaning

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

examples

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ultra-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

extreme, beyond

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

ultra-modern, ultrasound

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

un-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., participles

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

not, opposite

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

uncertain, unexpected

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

reverse action

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

untie, undress

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

under-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs,

participles

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

too little

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

underestimate,

under-developed

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

uni-

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

one

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

unilateral, unicycle

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

vice- nouns

suffixes that form nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

deputy

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

vice-chairman

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

suffix

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mainly added to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

usual meaning

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

examples

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-age

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

instance of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

breakage, shrinkage

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-al

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

instance of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

refusal, dismissal

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ance, -ancy

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

process/state of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

reluctance, performance, expectancy

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ation

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

process/state of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

exploration, starvation

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

product of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

organisation, foundation

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ee

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

object of verb

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

payee, employee

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ence, -ency

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

process/state of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

independence, presidency

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-er

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

belonging to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

teenager, Londoner

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-er/or

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

person/thing that does

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

writer, driver, starter, editor

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ess

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

female

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

lioness, waitress

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ette

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

small

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

kitchenette

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ful

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

amount held in

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

spoonful, cupful

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-hood

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

quality, group, time of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

brotherhood, childhood

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ing

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

quantity of material

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

carpeting, tubing

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

activity

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

farming, surfing

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ism

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

belief, practice

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

communism,

impressionism

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

■ity

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

quality of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

elasticity, falsity

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ment

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

process/result of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

government,

arrangement

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ness

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

quality of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

meanness, happiness

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ocracy

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

government by

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

democracy

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ology

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

study of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

sociology

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-phile

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

lover of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Anglophile

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-phobe

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

hater, fearer of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Anglophobe

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-phobia

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

irrational fear of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

arachnophobia (fear of spiders)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ship

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

status, state, quality of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

friendship, dictatorship

►

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark9>>3 suffixes that form nouns or adjectives

suffix mainly added to usual meaning    examples

-ese place nouns inhabitant of,    Chinese, Vietnamese

language of

-(i)an nouns    supporter of,    Darwinian, republican

related to

nouns    citizen of    Parisian, Moroccan

-ist nouns    practitioner of    pianist, racist

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark10>>4 suffixes that form adjectives

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

suffix

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mainly added to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

usual meaning

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

examples

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-able

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

can be (done)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

washable, drinkable

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-al

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

related to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

accidental

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-centric

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

centred on

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Eurocentric

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ed

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

having

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

wooded, pointed, blue-eyed

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-fill

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

full of, providing

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

useful, helpful

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ic

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

related to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

electric

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ical

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

related to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

philosophical, logical

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ish

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

rather (like)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

greenish, childish

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

place nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

inhabitant of, language of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Scottish, Turkish

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ive

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

can do, does

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

attractive, selective

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-less

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

without

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

careless, homeless

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-like

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

like

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

childlike

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ly

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

with the quality of

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

friendly, motherly

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ous

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

having

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

virtuous, ambitious

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-proof

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

protected/-ing against

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

bullet-proof waterproof

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ward

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

towards

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

backward, northward

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-y

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

like, characterised by

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

creamy, wealthy

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="3">
#+END_HTML

suffixes that form adverbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

suffix

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mainly added to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

usual meaning

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

examples

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ly

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

in an (adjective) way

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

calmly, slowly

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="2">
#+END_HTML

-ward(s) adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

towards

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

backwards, northward(s)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="3">
#+END_HTML

suffixes that form verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

suffix

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

mainly added to

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

usual meaning

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

examples

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ate

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

causative

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

orchestrate, chlorinate

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-en

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

make, become

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

deafen ripen, harden

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

“ify

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

causative: make

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

simplify, electrify

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ise/-ize

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

adj., nouns

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

various

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

modernise, symbolise

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark11>>7 Note: negative words with no positive
equivalent

Some words with negative prefixes have no positive opposite equivalent:
for example, somebody can be distressed, but not tressed. Other
examples: dishevilled, disappoint, discard, disclose, disconcert,
disfigure, dismiss, dispose, incessant, indelible, uncanny, uncouth,
ungainly, unkempt, unnerved, unspeakable, unwieldy, unwitting

For hyphens after co-, ex- etc, see 559.Id.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark12>>446 preparatory it (1): subject

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark13>>1    /t's nice to talk to you

When the subject of a clause is an infinitive expression, this does not
normally come at the beginning. We usually prefer to start with the
‘preparatory subject' ft, and to put the infinitive expression later
(long or complicated items are often put towards the end of a sentence -
see 512). Preparatory ft is common before be + adjective/noun.

Jf's nice to talk to you. (More natural than 7b fa/fc to you is mce.)

It was good of you to phone.

It was stupid of you to leave the door unlocked It's important to book
in advance.

It's my ambition to run a three-hour marathon.

It was a pleasure to listen to her.

It upsets me to hear people arguing all the time.

It can also be a preparatory subject for for + object + infinitive (see
291).

It will suit me best for you to arrive at about ten o'clock.

It's essential for the papers to be ready before Thursday.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark14>>2    It's probable that we'll be late

We also use preparatory it when the subject of a clause is itself a
clause.

It's probable that we'll be a little late.

It doesn't interest me what you think

It's surprising how many unhappy marriages there are.

It's exciting when a baby starts talking:

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark15>>3    It was nice seeing you

It can be a preparatory subject for an -ing form. This is usually
informal.

It was nice seeing you.    It's crazy her going off like that.

It's worth going to Wales if you have the time.

It's no itse trying to explain - Tm not interested.

It surprised me your not remembering my name.

For more information about structures with worth, see 632.

For there as a preparatory subject with anylno use, see 587.2.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark16>>4    It takes ... + infinitive

We can use this structure to say how much time is necessary (see 576).

It took me months to get to know her.

How long does it take to get to London from here?    »

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark17>>5    if, as if and as though

It is used to introduce some clauses with if, as if and as though.

It looks as if we're going to have trouble with Ann again.

It^{f}s not as if this was the first time she's been difficult.

It will be a pity if we have to ask her to leave.

But it looks as though we may have to.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark18>>6    It was my aunt who took Peter to London

It can be used in ‘cleft sentences* (see 131) with who- and
tfzaf-clauses to emphasise one part of a sentence.

It was my aunt who took Peter to London yesterday, not my mother.

(emphasising my aunt)

It was Peter that my aunt took to London yesterday, not Lucy.
(emphasising Peter)

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark19>>7    It's amazing the way they work together

It is not normally used as a preparatory subject for noun phrases.

The new concert hall is wonderful (not It's wonderftd-the-new
concert-haU.) But in an informal style, it can be a preparatory subject
for noun+relative clause.

It's wonderful the enthusiasm that the children show.

This is very common with the way...

It's amazing the way (that) they work together.

It's strange the way you know what Vm thinking.

For passive structures with it as a preparatory subject, see 417.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark20>>447 preparatory it (2): object

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark21>>1 I find it difficult to talk to you.

We can sometimes use it as a preparatory object. This happens when the
object of a verb is an infinitive expression or a clause, and when this
has an adjective or noun complement. For example, instead of saying ‘I
find to talk to you difficult', we prefer *1 find it difficult to talk
to you'.

subject + verb + it + complement + infinitive/clause

We found it tiring to listen to him.

My blister made it a problem to walk.

I thought it strange that she hadn't written.

George made it clear what he wanted Note that this structure is not
normally used when there is no adjective or noun complement after the
verb.

I cannot bear to see people crying, (not I cannot bear it to see people
crying.) I remember that we were very happy. (not I remember it that...)

But note the structure I likeflovefhate it when ...

I love it when you sing.

Note also the idiom I take it that... (= I assume that...).

I take it that you won't be working tomorrow.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark22>>2    I found it strange being...

This structure is also possible with -ing form objects.

I found it strange being in her house.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark23>>3    I would appreciate it if...

It is used as a preparatory object for an i/-clause after would
appreciate.

I would appreciate it if you would keep me informed, (not / would
appreciate if you would-...)

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark24>>4    owe and leave

Note the structures owe it to somebody to ... and leave it to somebody
to ... We owe it to society to make our country a better place:

I'll leave it to you to decide.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark25>>448 prepositions (1): introduction

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark26>>1    meanings and use

It is difficult to leam to use prepositions correctly in a foreign
language. Most English prepositions have several different functions
(for instance, one well-known dictionary lists eighteen main uses of
at), and these may correspond to several different prepositions in
another language. At the same time, different prepositions can have very
similar uses {in the morning, on Monday morning, at night). Many nouns,
verbs and adjectives are normally used with particular prepositions: we
say the reason for, arrive at, angry with somebody, on a bus. Often the
correct preposition cannot be guessed, and one has to leam the
expression as a whole. In some expressions English has no preposition
where one may be used in another language; in other expressions the
opposite is true. For details of some difficult cases of prepositional
usage, see 449-454.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark27>>2    word order

In English, prepositions can come at the ends of clauses in certain
structures, especially in an informal style. For details, see 452.

What are you thinking about?    She's not very easy to talk to.

You're just the person I was looking far. I hate being shouted at

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark28>>3    -ing forms

When we use verbs after prepositions, we use -ing forms, not
infinitives. For details, see 298, 454.

She saved money by giving up cigarettes.

When to is a preposition, it is also followed by -ing forms, (see
298.2).

I look forward to seeing you soon.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark29>>4    prepositions before conjunctions

Prepositions are sometimes dropped before conjunctions and sometimes
not. For details, see 453.

I'm not certain (of) what I'm supposed to do.

The question (of) whether they should turn back was never discussed. ►

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark30>>5 prepositions and adverb particles

Words like on, off, up, down can function both as prepositions and as
adverb particles. For the difference, see 20. For verbs with
prepositions and particles, see 599, 600.

She ran up the stairs, (preposition)

She rang me up. (adverb particle)

449 prepositions (2):

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark31>>after particular words and expressions

It is not always easy to know which preposition to use after a
particular noun, verb or adjective. Here are some of the most common
combinations which cause difficulty to students of English. Alternatives
are sometimes possible, and American and British usage sometimes differ.
There is only room for very brief notes here; for more complete
information about usage with a particular word, consult a good
dictionary.

accuse somebody of something (not for)

She accused me of poisoning her dog afraid of (not by)

Are you afraid of spiders? agree with a person, opinion or policy He
left the firm because he didn't agree with their sales policy.

I entirely agree with you. agree about a subject of discussion We agree
about most things. agree on a matter for decision Let's try to agree on
a date. agree to a suggestion I'll agree to your suggestion if you lower
the price. angry with (sometimes at) a person for doing something I'm
angry with her for lying to me. angry about (sometimes at) something
What are you so angry about? anxious about (= worried about)

Vm getting anxious about money. anxious for (= eager to have)

We're all anxious for an end to this misunderstanding. anxious +
infinitive (= eager, wanting)

She's anxious to find a better job. apologise to somebody for something
I think we should apologise to the Smiths.

I must apologise for disturbing you. arrive at or in (not to)

What time do we arrive at Cardiff?

When did you arrive in England? ask: see 79.

bad at (not in)

Ym not bad at tennis. believe a person or something that is said (=
accept as truthful/true

- no preposition)

Don't believe her.    I don't believe a word she says.

believe in God, Father Christmas etc (= believe that... exists; trust)

I half believe in life after death.

If you believe in me I can do anything. belong in/on/etc (= go, fit,
have its place in/on/etc)

Those glasses belong on the top shelf belong to (= be a member of)

I belong to a local athletics club. blue with cold, red with anger etc
My hands were blue with cold when I got home borrow: see 109.

care: see 127. clever at (not in)

Tm not very clever at cooking. congratulate/congratulations on something
I must congratulate you on your exam results.

Congratulations on your new job! congratulate/congratulations on/for
doing something He congratulated the team on/for having won all their
games. crash into (not usually against)

I wasn't concentrating, and I crashed into the car in front.

depend/dependent on (not from or of)

We may play football - it depends on the weather.

He doesn't want to be dependent on his parents.

But: independent of details of

Write now for details of our special offer. die of or from

More people died of flu in 1919 than were killed in the First World War.

A week after the accident he died from his injuries. different: see 155.

difficulty with something, (in) doing something (not
difficultics-to-...)

I'm having difficulty with my travel arrangements.

You won't have much difficulty (in) getting to know people in Italy.
disappointed with somebody My father never showed if he was disappointed
with me. disappointed with/at/about something You must be pretty
disappointed with/at/about your exam results.

[a] discussion about something We had a long discussion about politics.

[tol discuss something (no preposition)

We'd better discuss your travel plans. divide into (not in)

The book is divided into three parts.    ► dream of (= think of,
imagine)

I often dreamed of being famous when I was younger. dream about/of
(while asleep)

What does it mean if you dream about/of mountains? dress(ed) in (not
with)

Who's the woman dressed in green? drive into (not against)

Granny drove into a tree again yesterday.

enter into an agreement, a discussion etc

We've just entered into an agreement with Carsons Ltd. enter a place (no
preposition)

When I entered the room everybody stopped talking. example of (not for)

Sherry is an example of a fortified wine. explain something to somebody
(not explain somebody something) Could you explain this rule to me?

fight, struggle etc with I've spent the last two weeks fighting with the
tax office. frightened of or by: see 410.5.

get in(to) and out of a car, taxi or small boat When I got into my car,
I found the radio had been stolen. get on(to) and off a train, plane,
bus, ship, (motor)bike or horse We'll be getting off the train in ten
minutes. good at (not m)

Are you any good at tennis?

[the] idea of.. .ing (not the idea-to-...)

I don't like the idea of getting married yet ill with

The boss has been ill with flu this week. impressed with/by I'm very
impressed with/by your work. increase in activity, output etc (not of)

I'd like to see a big increase in productivity. independent,
independence of or from She got a job so that she could be independent
of her parents. When did India get its independence from Britain? insist
on (not to)

George's father insisted on paying. interest/interested in (not for)

When did your interest in social work begin?

Noi many people are Interested In grammar. interested to do /in doing
something: see 299.16

kind to (not with)

People have always been very kind to me.

lack of

Lack of time prevented me from writing,

[to] lack (no preposition)

Your mother lacks tact [to] be lacking in She is lacking in tact laugh
at I hate being laughed at laugh about We'll laugh about this one day
leave somewhere (talking about the action of leaving) I left London
early, before the traffic got too heavy. leave from somewhere (talking
about the place)

Does the plane leave from Liverpool or Manchester? listen to

If you don't listen to people, they won't listen to you. look at (=
point one's eyes at)

Stop looking at me like that. look after (= take care of)

Thanks Jbr looking after me when I was ill look for (= try to find)

Can you help me look for my keys?

make, made of/from: see 336. marriage to; get/be married to (not with)

Her marriage to Philip didn't last very long.

How long have you been married to Sheila? marry somebody (no
preposition)

She married her childhood sweetheart

near (to): see 365. nice to (not with)

You weren't very nice to me last night

operate on a patient

They operated on her yesterday evening.

pay for something that is bought (not Excuse me, sin You haven't paid
Jbr your drink pleased with somebody The boss is very pleased with you.
pleased with/about/at something I wasn't very pleased with!about!at my
exam results. polite to (not with)

Try to be polite to Uncle Richard for once prevent... from .. .ing (not
to)

The noise from downstairs prevented me from sleeping proof of (not for)

I want proof of your love. Lend me some money.

reason for (not of)

Nobody knows the reason for the accident remind of (and see 499)

She reminds me of a girl I was at school with.
responsible/responsibility for (not of)

Who's responsible for the shopping this week? rude to (not with)

Peggy was pretty rude to my family last weekend. run into (= meet)

I ran into Philip at Victoria Station this morning.

search (without preposition) (= look through; look everywhere in/on)
They searched everybody^{r}s luggage.

They searched the man in front of me from head to foot. search for (=
look for)

The customs were searching for drugs at the airport shocked at/by I was
terribly shocked at/by the news of Peter's accident shout at
(aggressive)

If you don't stop shouting at me 1*11 come and hit you. shout to (= call
to)

Mary' shouted to us to come in and swim. smile at

If you smile at me like that III give you anything you want sorry about
something that has happened Tm sorry about your exam results. sorry
for/about something that one has done Tm sorry for/about breaking your
window. sorry for a person I feel really sorry for her children. speak
to; speak with (especially AmE)

Could I speak to/with your father for a moment? suffer from My wife is
suffering from hepatitis. surprised at/by Everybody was surprised at/by
the weather.

take part in (not at or of)

I don't want to take part in any more conferences. think of/about (not
think to)

Vm thinking of studying medicine.

Vve also thought about studying dentistry. the thought of (not the
thought to)

I hate the thought of going back to work throw... at (aggressive)

Stop throwing stones at the cars. throw ... to (in a game etc)

If you get the ball, throw it to me. translate into (not in)

Could you translate this into Greek for me?

trip over

He tripped over the cat and fell downstairs. typical of (not for)

The wine's typical of the region.

write: see 610. wrong with

What's wrong with Rachel today?

For of after determiners like some, most, see 154.

450 prepositions (3):

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark32>>before particular words and expressions

This is a list of a few expressions which often cause problems. For
other preposition + noun combinations, see a good dictionary.

at the cinema; at the theatre; at a party; at university What's on at
the cinema this week?

a book (written) by Joyce; a concerto (composed) by Mozart; a film
(directed) by Orson Welles (not of oh from)

I've never read anything by Dickens. by
car/bike/bus/train/boaL/plane/land/sea/air; on foot (but in the car, on
a bus etc)

Let's take our time and go by boat.

for ... reason My sister decided to go to America for several reasons.

from ... point of view (not according-to or after)

Try to see it from my point of view.

in ... opinion (not according to or after)

In my opinion, she should have resigned earlier. in the end (= finally,
after a long time)

In the end, I got a visa for Russia. at the end (= at the point where
something stops)

I think the film's a bit weak at the end in pen, pencil, ink etc Please
fill in the form in ink. in a picture, photo etc (not on)

She looks much younger in this photo. in the rain, snow etc / like
walking in the rain. in a suit, raincoat, shirt, skirt, hat etc

Who's the man in the funny hat over there? in a ... voice

Stop talking to me in that stupid voice.    ►

on page 20 etc (not in/at)

There's a mistake on page 120. on the radio; on TV; on the phone Is
there anything good on TV tonight?

It's Mrs Ellis on the phone: she says it's urgent. on time (= at the
planned time, neither late nor early)

Peter wants the meeting to start exactly on time. in time (= with enough
time to spare, before the last moment)

He would have died if they hadn't got him to the hospital in time.

451 prepositions (4):

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark33>>expressions without prepositions

This is a list of some common expressions in which we do not use
prepositions, or can leave them out.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark34>>1    discuss, enter, marry, lack, resemble
and approach

These verbs are normally followed by direct objects without
prepositions.

We must discuss your plans. (not ... discuss about-yentr-piamr)
Conversation stopped as we entered the church, (not ... entered in(to)
the church.)

She married a friend of her sister's, (not .. . married with -...)

He's clever, but he lacks experience, (not ...lacks of...)

The child does not resemble either of its parents. (not ... resemble
to...) The train is now approaching London Paddington. (not ...
approaching to..)

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark35>>2    next, last etc

Prepositions are not used before a number of common expressions of time
beginning next, last, this, that (sometimes), one, every, each, some,
any (in an informal style), all.

See you next Monday, (not ... on next Monday.)

The meeting's this Thursday.    We met one Tuesday in August

I'll never forget meeting you that afternoon.

Come any day you like.    The party lasted all night

Note also tomorrow morning, yesterday afternoon etc.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark36>>3    days of the week

In an informal style, we sometimes leave out on before the names of the
days of the week.

Why don't you come for a drink (on) Monday evening?

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark37>>4    a meaning 'each'

No preposition is used in expressions like three times a day, sixty
miles an hour, eighty pence a kilo.

Private lessons cost £20 an hour.

For per in expressions like these, see 389.20

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark38>>5    What time ... ? etc

We usually leave out at before what time.

What time does Granny's train arrive?

(More natural than At what time ...?)

In an informal style, we can also leave out on before what/which day(s).
What day is your hair appointment?

Which day do you have your music lesson?

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark39>>6    about

In an informal style, at is often dropped before about + time
expression.

I'll see you (at) about 3 o'clock.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark40>>7    'how long'

In an informal style, for is often left out in expressions that say how
long something lasts.

I've been here (for) three weeks now. How long are you staying (for)?

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark41>>8    measurement expressions etc after be

Expressions containing words like height, weight, length, size, shape,
age, colour are usually connected to the subject of the clause by the
verb be, without a preposition.

He is just the right height to be a policeman.

She's the same age as me.

His head's a funny shape.

I'm the same weight as I was twenty years ago.

What shoe size are you?

What colour are her eyes? (not Of what colour...?)

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark42>>9    (in) this way etc

We often leave out in (especially in informal speech) in expressions
like (in) this way, (in) the same way, (in) another way etc.

They plant corn (in) the same way their ancestors used to 500 years ago.

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark43>>10    home

We do not use to before home (see 249).

I'm going home.

In informal English (especially American), at can be left out before
home.

Is anybody home?

<<main-28.xhtml#bookmark44>>11    place

In an informal style, to can be dropped in some expressions with the
word place. This is normal in American English.

Let's go (to) some place where it's quiet.

I always said you'd go places. (= become successful)

<<main-29.xhtml>>

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark0>>12    infinitive structures

Prepositions can be dropped in the structure noun + infinitive +
preposition (see 285.5).

She has no money to buy food (with).

We have an hour to do it (in).    ►

This is particularly common with the noun place.

We need a place to live (in). She had no place to go (to).

For the use of prepositions after near, see 365.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark1>>452 prepositions (5): at the ends of clauses

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark2>>1    introduction

A preposition often connects two things: (1) a noun, adjective or verb
that comes before it, and (2) a 'prepositional object' - a noun phrase
or pronoun that comes after the preposition.

This is a present for you. He's looking at her.

Vm really angry with Joe. They live in a small village:

In some structures we may put the prepositional object at or near the
beginning of a clause. In this case, the preposition does not always go
with it -it may stay together with ‘its' noun, adjective or verb at the
end of the clause. This happens especially in four cases:

wh-questions: Who's the present for? relative structures: Joe's the
person that I'm angry with. passives:    She likes to be looked at.

infinitive structures: The village is pleasant to live in.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark3>>2    w/7-questions

When a question word is the object of a preposition, the preposition
most often comes at the end of the clause, especially in informal usage.

Who's the present for? (For whom is the present? is extremely formal.)
What are you looking at?

Who did you go with?

Where did she buy it from?

Which flight is the general travelling on?

What kind of films are you interested in?

This also happens in indirect wh-questions, and in other what-ciauses.

Tell me what you're worried about What a lot of trouble I'm ini Some
questions consist simply of question word + preposition.

What with? Who for?

However, this structure is unusual when there is a noun with the
question word.

With what money? (not What money with?)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark4>>3    relative clauses

When a relative pronoun (see 494) is the object of a preposition, the
preposition also often goes at the end of the clause, especially in
informal usage.

Joe's the person that I'm angry with. (Less formal than ... with whom I
am angry.)

This is the house (that) I told you about (Less formal than ... about
which I told you.)

You remember the boy (who) I was going out with?

She's the only woman (who) Vve ever really been in love with.

That's what I'm afraid of.

Because whom is unusual in an informal style, it is very rare in clauses
that end with prepositions (see 498.3,7).

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark5>>4    passives

In passive structures (see 412-420), prepositions go with their verbs.

She likes to be looked at

I don't know where he is - his bed hasn't been slept in.

Carol was operated on last night

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark6>>5    infinitive structures

Infinitive complements (see 284-285) can have prepositions with them.

The village is pleasant to live in.

She needs other children to play with.

Can you get me a chair to stand on?

I've got lots of music to listen to.

Their house isn't easy to get to,

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark7>>6    exceptions

Many common adverbial expressions consist of preposition + noun phrase
(e.g. with great patience, in a temper). In these cases, the preposition
is closely connected with the noun, and is kept as near as possible to
it; it cannot usually be moved to the end of a clause.

I admired the patience with which she spoke, (not
...-tke-patienee-shespoke with.)

During and since are not normally put at the ends of clauses.

During which period did it happen? (not Which period did it happten
during?)

Since when have you been working Jbr her? (not When have-you been
working for her since?)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark8>>7    formal structures

In a more formal style, a preposition is often put earlier in questions
and relative structures, before the question word or relative pronoun.

With whom did she go?

It was the house about which he had told them.

She was the only woman with whom he had ever been in love.

This can also happen in infinitive complements, in a very formal style.

A relative pronoun is used.

She needs other children with whom to play.

It is a boring place in which to live.

Note that after prepositions which and whom can be used, but not
normally who and that

Even in a very formal style, prepositions are not often put at the
beginning of questions which have be as the main verb.

Who is it for, madam? (not For whom is it7)

And the structures where ... to, what... like and what... for have a
fixed order.

Where shall I send it to? (but not To where shall I send it?)    *

What does she look Uke? (but not Like what-does she look7)

What did you buy that for? (but not For-what-did you buy that?)
Prepositions cannot be moved away from passive verbs even in a forma]
style. In my family, money was never spoken about, (not ... about money
was never spoken.)

For more information about formal and informal language, see 311.

For sentences like Its got a hole in (it); I like cakes with cream on
(them), see 177.13.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark9>>453 prepositions (6): before conjunctions

Prepositions can be followed by conjunctions in some cases but not in
others.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark10>>1    indirect speech: prepositions dropped
before that

Prepositions are not used directly before the conjunction that. In
indirect speech - after words that refer to saying, writing, thinking
etc - prepositions are usually dropped before ffcaf-clauses. Compare:

-    I knew about his problems

I knew that he had problems (not / knew abeut that-he- had-problems.)

-    She had no idea of my state of mind.

She had no idea that I was unhappy.

(not She had-no idea of-thaH-was-unhappy.)

-    I wasn't aware of the time.

I wasn't aware that it was so late.

(not I wasn't aware of that it was so late.)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    emotional reactions: prepositions
dropped

Prepositions are also dropped before that after many common words that
refer to emotional reactions. Compare:

-    We are sorry about the delay. - 1 was surprised at her strength.

We are sorry that the train is late. I was surprised that she was so
strong. (not ... sorry about-thai -the train (not ... surprised at that
she was...) is late;)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark12>>3    the fact that

In other cases (not involving indirect speech or words referring to
emotional reactions) prepositions cannot so often be dropped before
that-clauses. Instead, the expression the fact (see 583.3) is generally
put between the preposition and that.

The judge paid a lot of attention to the fact that the child was unhappy
at home, (not The judge paid a lot-of attention (to) that the child...)

He said the parents were responsible for the fact that the child had run
away, (not .. .-iresponsible (for) that-the-chHd-had-run away.)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark13>>4    question words

After some very common words like tell_{f} ask, depend, sure_{t} idea,
look, prepositions can be dropped before who, which, what and other
question words. This is especially common in indirect questions.
Compare:

-    Tell me about your trip.

Tell me (about) where you went

-    I asked her about her religious beliefs.

I asked her whether she believed in God.

(More natural than I asked her about whether she believed in God.)

-    We may be late - it depends on the traffic.

We may be late - it depends (on) how much traffic there is.

-    Vm not sure of his method.

Vm not sure how he does it

(More natural than Vm not sure of how he does it)

-    Look at this.

Look (at) what Vve got In other cases it is unusual or impossible to
leave out the preposition.

Vm worried about where she is. (not Vm worried-wkere-she-is.)

The police questioned me about what Yd seen, (not The police questioned
me what I-dr-seen.)

There's the question of who's going to pay.

(More natural than ...the question who's going to pay.)

People's chances of getting jobs vary according to whether they live in
the North or the South, (not ...-according-whether-...)

If does not normally follow prepositions; we use whether (see 621)
instead. Vm worried about whether you're happy, (not Vm worried-about
-if-...)

For the structures (with and without preposition) that are possible
after a particular verb, noun or adjective, see a good dictionary.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark14>>454 prepositions (7): -ing forms and
infinitives

Prepositions are not normally used before infinitives in English. After
verb/ noun/adjective + preposition, we usually use the -ing form of a
following verb. He insisted on being paid at once, (not He insisted on
to be paid.. .)

I don't like the idea of getting married (not ... the idea of to get
married.) I'm not very good at cooking, (not ... good at to cook)

In some cases we drop the preposition and use an infinitive. Compare:

-    He asked Jbr a loan.    - We're travelling for pleasure.

He asked to borrow some money. We're travelling to enjoy ourselves.

-    She was surprised at his mistake.

She was surprised to see what he had done.

Sometimes two structures are possible. There is often a difference of
meaning or use. For more details, see 299.

Vm interested in learning more about my family.

I was interested to leam that my grandfather was Jewish.

For details of the structures that are possible after a particular verb,
noun or adjective, see a good dictionary.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark15>>455 present perfect (1): basic information

This entry deals with the simple present perfect. For the present
perfect progressive, see 458-459.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark16>>1    forms

havelhas + past participle

J have broken my glasses.

Have you finished? She hasn't phoned In older English, some present
perfect forms were made with be, not have (e.g. Winter is come). This
does not normally happen in modem English (for exceptions, see 205 and
213).

For details of question structures, see 480-486. For negatives, see
367-371.

For passive forms (e.g. The work has l>een done), see 412.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark17>>2    other languages

In some other languages there are verb forms which are constructed like
the English present perfect (compare English / have worked, French j'ai
travaille, German ich habe gearbeitet, Italian ho lavorato, Spanish he
trabajado). Note that the English present perfect is used rather
differently from most of these.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark18>>3 finished events connected with the present

We use the present perfect especially to say that a finished action or
event is connected with the present in some way. If we say that
something has happened, we are thinking about the past and the present
at the same time. I can't go on holiday because I have broken my leg.
(not I-can't-go on holiday because / broke my leg.)

We could often change a present perfect sentence into a present sentence
with a similar meaning.

I^{f}ve broken my leg. -» My leg is broken now.

Have you read the Bible. -> Do you know the Bible?

Some fool has let the cat in. -► The cat is in.

Utopia has invaded Fantasia. Utopia is at war with Fantasia.

Mary has had a baby. -*■ Mary now has a baby Our dog has died. Our dog
is dead

All the wars in history have taught us nothing. -► We know nothing.

The present perfect is often used to express the idea of completion or
achievement.

At last! I've finished!

Have you done all the housework?

We do not use the present perfect if we are not thinking about the
present (see 456.1). Compare:

I've travelled in Africa a lot. (= I know Africa.)

Some people think that Shakespeare travelled a lot in Germany, (not Some
people think that Shakespeare-has travelled ...)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark19>>present perfect: thinking about the past and
present at the same time

I can't go on holiday because Fife broken my leg.

NOW

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

PAST

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark20>>finished events: news

We normally use the present perfect to announce news of recent events,
Andy has won a big prize!

Have you heard? Unde George has crashed the car again.

Here are the main points of the news. The pound has fallen against the
dollar. The Prime Minister has said that the government's economic
policies are working. The number of unemployed has reached five million.
There has been a fire ...

After announcing news, we usually use the simple past to give more
details, (see 456.5).

Uncle George has crashed the car again. He ran into a tree in High
Street.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

PAST

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

NOW

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark21>>simple past for details

He ran into a tree in High Street.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

PAST

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

NOW

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark22>>5    time words: ever, before, recently etc

When we talk about finished events with words that mean 'at some/any
time up to now' (like ever, before, never, yet, recently, lately,
already), we normally use the present perfect.

Have you ever seen a ghost? She's never said ^{4}sorry' in her life.

I'm sure we've met before. Has the postman come yet?

We haven't seen Beth recently.

Could you clean the car?~ I've already done it.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark23>>6    repetition up to now: I've written six
letters ...

We can use the present perfect to say that something has happened
several times up to the present.

I've written six letters since lunchtime.

Adverbs of frequency like often, sometimes, occasionally are common with
the present perfect.

How often have you been in love in your life?

I've sometimes thought of moving to Australia

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark24>>7    continuation up to now: I've known her
for years

To talk about actions and situations that have continued up to the
present, both the simple present perfect and the present perfect
progressive are possible (depending on the kind of verb and the exact
meaning - for details, see 459).

I've known her for years, (not I know her for years. - see 460.1)

I've been thinking about you all day.

For present perfect tenses in clauses referring to the future (e.g. 77/
take a rest when Vve finished cleaning the kitchen), see 580.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark25>>456 present perfect (2): perfect or past?

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark26>>1 thinking about past and present together

We use the present perfect if we are thinking about the past and present
together. We do not use the present perfect if we are not thinking about
the present. Compare:

-    My sister has learnt French. (She can speak French now.)

Shakespeare probably learnt Italian. (not Shakespeare has
probably-learnt

i. ♦ \

TtC+TtCtft. ]

-    We've studied enough to pass the exam. (The exam is still to come.)

We studied enough to pass the exam. (The exam is over.)

-    Ann and Peter have got married! (news)

My parents got married in Canada

We do not use the present perfect in story-telling.

Once upon a time a beautiful princess fell in love with a poor farmer.

(not ... has fallen in love ...)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark27>>thinking about the past and present
together: present perfect My sister has learnt French. (-She can speak
French now.)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark28>>only thinking about the past: simple past
Shakespeare probably learn t Italian.

THOUGHTS

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark29>>finished-time words: present perfect not
used

We do not often use the present perfect with words that refer to a
completely finished period of time, like yesterday, last week, then,
when, three years ago, in 1970. This is because the present perfect
focuses on the present, and words like these focus on the past, so they
contradict each other. Compare:

-    Have you seen Lucy anywhere?

I saw Lucy yesterday. (not I have seen Lucy yesterday.)

-    Tom has hurt his leg; he can't walk.

Tom hurt his leg last week (not Tom -has hurt his leg last week)

-    What have you done with the car keys? I can't find them.

What did you do then? (not What have you done-then?)

-    My brother has had an accident. He's in hospital.

When did the accident happen? (not When-has the accident happened?)

-    All my friends have moved to London.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark30>>Eric moved three years ago. (not Erie-has
moved three years ago.)

For tenses with just and just now, see 307.    »

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark31>>3    even before, recently etc

But with words that mean ‘at some/any time up to now' (like ever,
before, never, yet, recently, already), we normally use the present
perfect (see 455.5). ifai/e yow ei/er been to Chicago? Vve seen this
film before.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark32>>4    time not mentioned

We use the present perfect when we are thinking of a period of ‘time up
to now', even if we do not mention it.

Have you seen ^{4}Romeo and Juliet'? (= Have you ever seen it? or Have
you seen the present production?)

You've done a lot for me. (... up to now)

On the other hand, we do not use the present perfect when we are
thinking of a particular finished time, even if we do not mention it.

Did you see ‘Romeo and Juliet'? (It was on TV last night.)

My grandfather did a lot for me. (... when he was alive)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark33>>5    news and details

We normally use the present perfect to announce news (see 455.4).

But when we give more details, we usually change to a past tense.

Joe has passed his exam! He got 87%.

There has been a plane crash near Bristol Witnesses say that there was
an explosion as the aircraft was taking off ...

The Prime Minister has had talks with President Kumani. During a
three-hour meeting they discussed the economic situation, and agreed on
the need for closer trade links between the two countries.

For more details, exceptions and notes on American usage, see 457.6.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark34>>457 present perfect (3): perfect or past
(advanced points)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark35>>1 causes and origins: Who gave you that?

We normally use the present perfect when we are thinking about past
events together with their present results (see 455.3).

I can't come to your party because Vve broken my leg.

However, we usually prefer a past tense when we identify the person,
thing or circumstances responsible for a present situation (because we
are thinking about the past cause, not the present result). Compare:

-    Look what John's given me! (thinking about the gift)

Who gave you that? (thinking about the past action of giving)

-    Some fool has let the cat in.

Who let that cat in?

Other examples:

Why are you crying?* Granny hit me. (not ... Granny has hit me.)

I'm glad you were born. How did you get that bruise?

That's a nice picture. Did you paint it yourself?

Some people think that Pericles' was not written by Shakespeare.

The Chinese invented paper, (not The Chinese-have mvented paper.)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark36>>2    expectation and reality: You're older
than I thought

We use a past tense to refer to a belief that has just been shown to be
true or false.

It's not as bigas I expected, (not .. .-as Ihave-expeeted:)

You're older than I thought (not ... than I have thought.)

But you promised ... / (not But you have promised ... /)

1 knew you would help me! (not / have known .../)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark37>>3    today, this week etc

With definite expressions of ‘time up to now' (e.g. today,this week),
perfect and past tenses are often both possible. We prefer the present
perfect if we are thinking of the whole period up to now. We prefer the
simple past if we are thinking of a finished part of that period.
Compare:

-    I haven't seen John this week (the whole week up to now - present
perfect

more natural)

I saw John this week, and he said... (earlier in the week - simple past
more natural)

-    Has Ann phoned today? (meaning 'any time up to now*)

Did Ann phone today? (meaning ‘earlier, when the call was expected')

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark38>>4    always, ever and never

In an informal style, simple past tenses are sometimes possible with
always, ever and never when they refer to 'time up to now'.

I always knew I could trust you. (or Vve always known ...)

Did you ever see anything like that before? (or Have you ever seen ...?)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark39>>5    present perfect with past time
expressions

Grammars usually say that the present perfect cannot be used together
with expressions of finished time - we can say I have seen him or I saw
him yesterday, but not i-have-seen- him yesterday. In fact, such
structures are unusual but not impossible (though learners should avoid
them). They often occur in brief news items, where space is limited and
there is pressure to announce the news and give the details in the same
clause.

Here are some real examples taken from news broadcasts, newspaper
articles, advertisements, letters and conversations.

Police have arrested more than 900 suspected drugs traffickers in raids
throughout the country on Friday and Saturday ... a runner who's beaten
Linford Christie earlier this year.

A 24-year-old soldier has been killed in a road accident last night.

The horse's trainer has had a winner here yesterday.

... indicating that the geological activity has taken place a very long
time ago

Perhaps what has helped us to win eight major awards last year alone...
/ have stocked the infirmary cupboard only yesterday.

I am pleased to confirm that Lloyds Bank... has opened a Home Loan
account for you on 19th May.    »

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark40>>6    simple past for news

Recendy, some British newspapers have started regularly using the simple
past for smaller news announcements - probably to save space. This also
happens on TV text news pages. Some authentic examples:

An unnamed Ulster businessman was shot dead by terrorists...

A woman was jailed for six months after taking a baby boy from his
mother Driving wind and rain forced 600 out of2,500 teenagers to abandon
the annual Ten Tor' trek across Dartmoor.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark41>>7    American English

In American English the simple past is often used to give news.

Did you hear? Switzerland declared I has declared war on Mongolia!

(BrE Have you heard? Switzerland has declared war...)

Uh, honey,1 lost / I've lost the keys (BrE ... I've lost...)

Lucy just called (BrE Lucy has just called.)

In American English, it is also possible to use the simple past with
indefinite past-time adverbs like already, yet, ever and before.

Did you eat already? or Have you eaten...? (BrE Have you eaten already?)
I didn't call Bobby yet or I haven't called... (BrE I haven't called...)
British English is changing under American influence, so some of these
uses are becoming common in Britain as well.

For more about tenses with just, see 307.

For more about British-American differences, see 51.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark42>>8    bad rules (1): 'definite time'

Grammars sometimes say that the present perfect is not used with
expressions referring to ‘definite time'. This is confusing - the
present perfect is not often used with finished time expressions, but it
actually is very common with definite time expressions. Compare:

Vve lived here for exactly three years, seven months and two days.

(present perfect with very definite time-reference)

Once upon a time a little girl lived with her mother in a lonely house
in a dark forest (simple past with very indefinite time-reference)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark43>>9    bad rules (2): 'finished actions'

Note also that the choice between simple present perfect and simple past
does not depend on whether we are talking about finished actions, as
learners^{1} grammars sometimes suggest (though it can depend on whether
we are talking about finished time periods). Compare:

That cat has eaten your supper, (finished action - present perfect)

I ate the last of the eggs this morning, (finished action - simple past)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark44>>10 bad rules (3): 'recent actions'

The choice also does not depend direcdy on whether actions and events
are recent. Recent events are more likely to be ‘news', and we are more
likely to be concerned about their present results, so many present
perfect sentences are in fact about recent events. But it is possible to
use the present perfect to talk about things that happened a long time
ago. Compare:

The French revolution has influenced every popular radical movement in
Europe since 1800. (200-year-old event - present perfect)

Ann phoned five minutes ago. (very recent event - simple past)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark45>>11 both possible

The difference between the present perfect and the simple past is not
always very clear-cut. It often depends on our ‘focus*: are we thinking
mosdy about the present relevance of a past event, or about the past
details? In some cases both present perfect and past are possible with
little difference of meaning. We (have) heard that you have rooms to
let.

Has Mark phoned? or Did Mark phone?

Vve given /1 gave your old radio to Philip.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark46>>458 present perfect (4):

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark47>>progressive (or 'continuous')

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark48>>1    forms

have/has been + -ing

I have been thinking about you.

Have you been waiting long?

I haven't been studying very well recently.

For double letters in words like sitting, stopping, see 562.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark49>>2    continuing actions and situations

We use the present perfect progressive to look back over actions and
situations which started in the past and are still going on.

I've been working very hard recently.

It's been raining all day. I'm tired of it.

House prices have been going up steadily all this year.

We often use the present perfect progressive to talk about people's use
of their time up to the present.

Hif What have you been doing with yourself? ~I've been trying to write a
novel

That kid has been watching TV non-stop since breakfast.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark50>>present perfect progressive: actions and
situations which started in the past and are still going on

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark51>>3    actions and situations that have just
stopped

We also use the present perfect progressive for actions and situations
which have just stopped, but which have present results.

You look hot Yes, I've been running.

Sorry I'm late. Have you been waiting long?

I must just go and wash. I've been gardening.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark52>>4    repeated actions

We can use the present perfect progressive for repeated as well as
continuous activity.

People have been phoning me all day.

Vve been waking up in the night a lot I think VU see the doctor.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark53>>5    time expressions: recently, lately,
this week, since for..etc

We often use the present perfect progressive with words that refer to a
period of time continuing up to now, like recently, lately, this week,
since January, for the last three days.

The firm has been losing money recently,

John's been walking in Scotland all this week.

I've been doing a new job since January.

It's been raining for the last three days.

For the difference between since and for, see 208.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark54>>6    not used with finished time expressions

We cannot use the present perfect progressive with expressions that
refer to a finished period of time.

You look tired. ~ Yes. I was cycling from midday until five o'clock (not
... Vve been cycling from-midday-until five o'clock.)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark55>>7    how long?

We use the present perfect progressive, not the present progressive, to
talk about how long something has been happening.

How long have you been studying English? (not How long are you
studying...?)

I've been working here for two months. (not Vm working here for two
months.)

For details, see 460.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark56>>8    present perfect progressive and
(simple) present perfect

In some cases, we can also use the simple present perfect to talk about
actions and situations continuing up to the present. Compare:

-    How long have you been working with her?

How long have you known her?

-    That man has been standing on the comer all day.

For 900 years the castle has stood on the hill above the village.

For the differences, see 459.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark57>>459    present perfect (5): simple or
progressive?

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark58>>1    non-progressive verbs

Some verbs are not used in progressive forms (see 471), even if the
meaning is one for which a progressive form is more suitable. Common
examples are be, have and know.

John's been ill all week, (not John's been being ill...)

She's had a cold since Monday, (not She's been having a cold...)

I've only known her for two days, (not I've only been-knotvmg-her-...)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark59>>2    temporary or permanent

We use progressive forms mostly for shorter, temporary actions and
situations. When we talk about longer-lasting or permanent situations we
often prefer the simple present perfect. Compare:

-    That man has been standing on the corner all day.

For 900 years the castle has stood on the hill above the village.

-    I haven't been working very well recently.

He hasn't worked for years.

-    I've been living in Sue's flat for the last month.

My parents have lived in Bristol all their lives.

Progressive and simple tenses are sometimes both possible, with a slight
difference of emphasis.

It's been raining f It's rained steadily since last Saturday.

Harry has been working / has worked in the same job for thirty years.

We generally use the progressive to talk about continuous change or
development, even if this is permanent.

Scientists believe that the universe has been expanding steadily since
the beginning of time.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark60>>3    how much? how often? simple present
perfect

We use the simple present perfect to say how much we have done, or how
often we have done something. Compare:

-    I've been planting rose bushes all afternoon.

Look at all the rose bushes I've planted! (not ... I've been planting.)

-    We've been painting the house.

We've painted two rooms since lunchtime, (not -Hfefre been-painting two
rooms since lunchtime.)

-    I've been playing a lot of tennis recently.

I've played tennis three times this week.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark61>>460    present perfect (6): present perfect
or present?

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark62>>1 how long? present perfect

We use a present perfect to say how long a situation or action has
continued up to now. Compare:

-    It's raining again.

It's been raining since Christmas, (not It's raining since Christmas.)

-    Are you learning English?

How long have you been learning? (not How long are-you learning?) ►

-    I hear you're working at Smiths. ~ Yes, I've been working therefor
a month.

(not I'm working there for...)

-    I know her well.

I've known her for years, (not I know her for years.)

-    My brother's a doctor.

How long has he been a doctor? (not How long is he a-doetor?)

Compare also:

How long are you here for? (= until when; when are you leaving?)

How long have you been here for? (= since when; when did you arrive?)

For the difference between simple and progressive forms, see 459.

For the difference between since and Jbr, see 208.

For tenses with since, see 522.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark63>>2 This is the first time etc

We use a simple present perfect after this is the first time that...,
it's the second... that..., and similar structures (see 591).

This is the first time that Vve heard her sing, (not This is the first
time-thatl hear her sing.)

It's the fifth time you've asked me the same question.

This is only the second opera I've ever seen.

For present perfect and simple present passives with similar meanings
(e.g. The shop has been / is closed), see 420.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark64>>461 present tenses (1): introduction

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark65>>1 the two present tenses

Most English verbs have two present tenses. Forms like I wait, she
thinks are called ‘simple present' or ‘present simple'; forms like I am
waiting or she's thinking are called ‘present progressive' or ‘present
continuous*. The two present tenses are used in different ways.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark66>>2    general time: simple present

When we talk about permanent situations, or about things that happen
regularly or all the time (not just around now), we usually use the
simple present (see 462-463 for details).

My parents live near Dover.    Water freezes at (f Celsius

I go to London about three times a week

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark67>>3    around now: present progressive

When we talk about temporary continuing actions and events, which are
just going on now or around now, we usually use a present progressive
tense (see 464 for details).

What are you doing? ~ I'm reading.

I'm travelling a lot these days.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark68>>4 future time

Both present tenses can be used to talk about the future.

VII meet you when you arrive.

Come and see us next week if you're passing through London.

For the differences, see 463-464, 466.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark69>>462 present tenses (2): simple present
(forms)

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark70>>1 forms

| Affirmative       | Question               | Negative                  |
| I work            | do I work?             | I do not work             |
| you work          | do you work?           | you do not work           |
| he/she/it works   | does he/she/it work?   | he/she/it does not work   |
| we work           | do we work?            | we do not work            |
| they work         | do they work?          | they do not work          |

-    Contracted negatives (see 143): I don't work, he doesn't work etc

-    Negative questions (see 368): do I not work? or don't I work? etc

For passives (e.g. The work is done), see 412.

<<main-29.xhtml#bookmark71>>2 spelling of third person singular forms

| Most verbs: add -s to infinitive                                | work -*• works sit -> sits stay -> stays                                    |
| Verbs ending in consonant + y, change y to i and add -es        | cry -> cries hurry -> hurries reply -> replies                              |
| But (vowel + y):                                                | enjoy enjoys                                                                |
| Verbs ending in -s, -z, -ch, -sh or -jc add -es to infinitive   | miss -> misses buzz -> buzzes watch -> watches push -> pushes fix -»fixes   |
| Exceptions:                                                     | have has go -► goes do -> does                                              |

<<main-30.xhtml>>

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark0>>3 pronunciation of third person singular
forms

The pronunciation of the -(e)s ending depends on the sound that comes
before it. The rules are the same as for the plural -(e)s ending - see
525.

Irregular pronunciations: says (/sez/, not /seiz/); does (/dAz/_{f} not
/duiz/).

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark1>>463 present tenses (3): simple present (use)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark2>>1 general time: It always rains in November

We often use the simple present to talk about permanent situations, or
about things that happen regularly, repeatedly or all the time.

What do frogs eat? (not What-are frogs eating?)

It always rains here in November.

I play tennis every Wednesday.

Alice works for an insurance company.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark3>>simple present: permanent situations

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

simple present: things that happen repeatedly

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark4>>2    not used for things happening just
around the present

We do not usually use the simple present to talk about temporary
situations or actions that are only going on around the present.
Compare:

-    Water boils at 100^{0} Celsius.

The kettle's boiling - shall I make tea? (not The kettle boils...)

-    It usually snows in January.

Look - it's snowing! (not Look--- It snows!)

-    I play tennis every Wednesday:

Where's Bernard?\^ He's playing tennis, (not ... He plays tennis.)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark5>>3    non-progressive verbs

However, the simple present is used for this 'around the present'
meaning with verbs that do not have progressive forms (see 471).

I like this wine very much, (not I'm Uking...)

I believe you. (not Fnt believing you.)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark6>>4    talking about the future

We do not normally use the simple present to talk about the future.

I promise I won't smoke any more, (not I promise I don't smoke any
more.) We're going to the theatre this evening, (not We go to the
theatre this evening.)

There's the doorbell ~I'U get it. (not I get it.)

However, the simple present is used for ‘timetabled' future events (see
215).

His train arrives at 11.46. I start my new job tomorrow.

And the simple present is often used instead of will... in subordinate
clauses that refer to the future. (For details, see 580).

I'll kill anybody who touches my possessions, (not ... who will touch
...) I'll phone you when I get home, (not ... when I'll get-home:)

The simple present is also used in suggestions with Why don't you...?

Why don't you take a day off tomorrow?

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark7>>5    series of events: demonstrations,
commentaries, instructions, stories

When we talk about series of completed actions and events, we often use
the simple present. This happens, for example, in demonstrations,
commentaries, instructions and present-tense stories (see 465 for more
details).

First I take a bowl and break two eggs into it. Next... (not First I am
taking

L|| i >f    \

U OVWl . . .)

Lydiard passes to Taylor, Taylor shoots - and it's a goal!

How do I get to the station? ~ You go straight on to the traffic lights,
then you turn left,\_\_\_\_

So I go into the office, and I see this man, and he says to me...

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark8>>6    how long? present tenses not used

We use a perfect tense, not a present tense, to say how long a present
action or situation has been going on. (See 460 for details.)

I've known her since 1960. (not I know her-since-t96B.)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark9>>464 present tenses (4): progressive (or
'continuous')

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark10>>1    present progressive: forms

am! are! is + -ing I am waiting:

Are you listening? She isn't working today.

For double letters in words like sitting, stopping, see 562.

For passive forms (e.g. The ivork is being done), see 412.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    use: 'around now'

We use the present progressive to talk about temporary actions and
situations that are going on now or 'around now*: before, during and
after the moment of speaking.

Hurry up! We're all waiting for you! (not We-all wait...)

What are you doing?~I'm writing letters, (not ... I-wriie-letters:)    ►

Why are you crying? Is something wrong? (not Why do you cry?...) He's
working in Saudi Arabia at the moment

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark12>>present progressive: temporary actions and
situations going on now or around now

A

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark13>>3    repeated actions

The present progressive can refer to repeated actions and events, if
these are just happening around the present (for more details, see 466).

Why is he hitting the dog? Fm travelling a lot these days.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark14>>4    changes

We also use the present progressive to talk about developments and
changes. That child's getting bigger every day. House prices are going
up again.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark15>>5    talking about the future

We often use the present progressive to talk about the future (see 214).

What are you doing tomorrow evening?

Come and see us next week if you're passing through London.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark16>>6    things that happen all the time: not
used

We do not normally use the present progressive to talk about permanent
situations, or about things that happen regularly, repeatedly or all the
time. Compare:

-    Look - the cat's eating your breakfast!

What do bears eat? ~ Everything. (not What-are bears eating?...)

-    Why is that girl standing on the table?

Chetford Castle stands on a hill outside the town, (not ... is
standing...)

-    My sister's living at home for the moment Your parents live in
North London, don't they?

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark17>>7    verbs not used in progressive forms

Some verbs are not used in progressive forms (see 471), even if the
meaning is ‘just around now'.

I like this wine. (not Vm liking-this wine.)

Do you believe what he says? (not Are you believing... ?)

The tank contains about 7,000 litres at the moment (not The tank is

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark18>>8 how long? present tenses not used

We use a perfect tense, not a present tense, to say how long something
has been going on. (See 460 for details.)

I've been learning English for three years, (not Vm learning English
for-three

yvttrs.)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark19>>465 present tenses (5):

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark20>>stories, commentaries and instructions

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark21>>1    stories

Present tenses are often used informally to tell stories. The simple
present is used for the events - the things that happen one after
another. The present progressive is used for ‘background* - things that
are already happening when the story starts, or that continue through
the story. (This is like the difference between the simple past and past
progressive: see 422.)

So I open the door, and I look out into the garden, and I see this man.
He's wearing pyjamas and a policeman's helmet. *Hello,' he says...

There's this Scotsman, you see, and he's walking through the jungle when
he meets a gorilla. And the gorilla's eating a snake sandwich. So the
Scotsman goes up to the gorilla ...

The simple present is common in summaries of plays, stories, etc.

In Act I, Hamlet sees the ghost of his father. The ghost tells him ...

Chapter 2: Henry goes to Scotland and meets the Loch Ness Monster.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark22>>2    commentaries

In commentaries, the use of tenses is similar. The simple present is
used for the quicker actions and events (which are finished before the
sentences that describe them); the present progressive is used for
longer actions and situations. There are more simple and fewer
progressive tenses in a football commentary, for instance, than in a
commentary on a boat race.

Smith passes to Devaney, Devaney to Barnes - and Harris intercepts...
Harris passes back to Simms, nice ball - and Simms shoots!

Oxford are pulling slightly ahead of Cambridge now; they're rowing with
a beautiful rhythm; Cambridge are looking a little disorganised...

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark23>>3    instructions and demonstrations

We often use present tenses in a similar way to give instructions,
demonstrations and directions.

OK let's go over it again. You wait outside the bank until the manager
arrives. Then you radio Louie, who's waiting round the corner, and he
drives round to the front entrance. You and Louie grab the manager...

First I put a lump of butter into a flying pan and light the gas; then
while the butter's melting I break three eggs into a bowl, like this...

How do I get to the station?** You go straight on to the traffic lights,
then you turn left...

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark24>>466 present tenses (6): advanced points

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark25>>1    repeated actions: simple or
progressive?

The present progressive can refer to repeated actions and events, if
these are happening around the moment of speaking.

Why is he hitting the dog?

Jake's seeing a lot of Felicity these days.

But we do not use the present progressive for repeated actions and
events which are not closely connected to the moment of speaking.

I go to the mountains about twice a year: (not Vm going to the momttmns
about twice a year.)

Water boils at 100 Celsius, (not Water is boiling at 100^{L} Celsius.)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark26>>2    long-lasting changes

We use the present progressive for changes and developments, even if
these are very long-lasting.

The climate is getting warmer. (not The climate gets warmer.)

The universe is expanding and has been since its beginning.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark27>>3    You look lovely when you're smiling

We use the simple present for regular or repeated actions and events;
but we can use the present progressive for things that are going on
around these actions and events.

At seven, when the post comes, Vm usually having breakfast.

She doesn't like to be disturbed if she's working.

You look lovely when you're smiling.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark28>>4    I promise ... etc

Sometimes we do things by saying special words (e.g. promising,
agreeing). We usually use the simple present in these cases.

I promise never to smoke again, (not Vm promising...)

I swear that I will tell the truth ...

I agree. (not / am agreeing)

He denies the accusation, (not He is denying...)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark29>>5    / hear etc

The simple present is used with a perfect or past meaning in
introductory expressions like I hear, I see_{t} I gather, I understand
(see 243).

I hear you're getting married. (= I have heard ...)

I see there's been trouble down at the factory.

I gather Peter's looking Jbr a job.

Quotations are often introduced with says.

No doubt you all remember what Hamlet says about suicide.

It says in the paper that petrol's going up again.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark30>>6    Here comes ... etc

Note the structures here comes ... and there goes....

Here comes your husband (not Here-is -coming..)

There goes our bus - we'll have to wait for the next one.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark31>>7    I feel / I'm feeling

Verbs that refer to physical feelings (e.g. feel, hurt, ache) can often
be used in simple or progressive tenses without much difference of
meaning.

How do you feel? or How are you feeling?

My head aches, or My head is aching.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark32>>8    formal correspondence

Some fixed phrases that are used in letter-writing can be expressed
either in the simple present (more formal) or in the present progressive
(less formal). We write to advise you... (Less formal: We are writing to
let you know...) I enclose my cheque for £200. (Less formal: I am
enclosing...)

I look forward to hearing from you. (Less formal: I'm looking forward to
hearing...)

For progressive forms with always and similar words (e.g. She's always
losing her keys), see 472. For progressive forms in general, see 470.

For the 'distancing* use of progressive forms, see 436.

For simple and progressive forms in older English, see 392.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark33>>467    presently

When presently means ‘now, at present*, it usually comes in mid-position
with the verb (see 24).

Professor Holloway is presently working on plant diseases.

The Manager is presently on holiday, but he will contact you on his
return. An older meaning of presently (becoming less common) is ‘not
now, later', ‘in a minute'.

With this meaning, presently usually comes in end-position, or
separately as a short answer.

He's having a rest now. Hell be down presently.

Mummy, can I have an ice-cream? ~ Presently, dear.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark34>>468    price and prize

The price is what you pay if you buy something. A prize is what you are
given if you have done something exceptional, or if you win a
competition.

What's the price of the green dress? (not .. .- the prize of the green
dress?) She received the Nobel prize for physics, (not ... the
Nobel-price...)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark35>>469    principal and principle

These two words have the same pronunciation. The adjective principal
means ‘main', ‘most important'.

What's your principal reason for wanting to be a doctor? (not ... your
principle reason ...)

The noun principal means ‘headmaster' or ‘headmistress' (especially, in
Britain, of a school for adults).

If you want to leave early you'll have to ask the Principal    ►

A principle is a scientific law or a moral rule.

Newton discovered the principle of universal gravitation, (not .. .-the
principal of universal gravitation.)

She's a girl with very strong principles.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark36>>470 progressive (1): general

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark37>>1 forms

Progressive verb forms (also called ‘continuous' forms) are made with be
+ -ing.

I am waiting for the shops to open, (present progressive)

Your suit is being cleaned, (present progressive passive)

She phoned while I was cooking, (past progressive)

I didn't know how long she had been sitting there, (past perfect
progressive) Will you be going out this evening? (future progressive)

Yd like to be lying on the beach now. (progressive infinitive)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    terminology and use

A progressive form does not simply show the time of an event. It also
shows how the speaker sees the event - generally as ongoing and
temporary, not completed or permanent. (Because of this, grammars often
talk about ‘progressive aspect' rather than 'progressive tenses*.)
Compare:

-    Vve read your letter, (completed action)

Vve been reading a lot of thrillers recently, (not necessarily
completed)

-    The Rhine runs into the North Sea. (permanent)

We'll have to phone the plumber - water's running down the kitchen wall
(temporary)

When a progressive is used to refer to a short momentary action, it
often suggests repetition.

Why are you jumping up and down?

The door was banging in the wind

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    distancing

Progressive forms can make requests, questions and statements less
direct. (They sound less definite than simple forms, because they
suggest something temporary and incomplete.)

I'm hoping you can lend me £10. (less definite than I hope...)

What time are you planning to arrive?

Vm looking forward to seeing you again.

Ym afraid we must be going.

I was wondering if you had two single rooms.

Will you be going away at the weekend?

For more about this kind of ‘distancing', see 436.

For more details of the use of progressives, see the individual entries
on the present progressive, past progressive etc.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark40>>verbs not used in progressive ('continuous')
forms

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark41>>471 progressive (2): non-progressive verbs

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Some verbs are never or hardly ever used in progressive forms.

I like this music. (not I'm liking this music.)

[ rang her up because I needed to talk, (not ... because I was needmg-to
talk:)

Some other verbs are not used in progressive forms when they have
certain meanings. Compare:

Vm seeing the doctor at ten o'clock.

[ see what you mean, (not I'm seeing what you mean.)

Many of these non-progressive verbs refer to states rather than actions.
Some refer to mental states (e.g. know, think, believe); some others
refer to the use of the senses (e.g. smell, taste).

Modal verbs (e.g. can_{f} must) have no progressive forms. See 353.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark42>>common non-progressive verbs

Here is a list of some common verbs which are not often used in
progressive forms (or which are not used in progressive forms with
certain meanings).

mental and emotional states

believe    (dis)like

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

see (= understand) suppose

think (= have an opinion)

understand

want

wish

sound

taste

promise

satisfy

seem

surprise

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

doubt    love

feel (= have an opinion)    prefer

hate    realise

imagine    recognise

know    remember

use of the senses feel    see

hear    smell

communicating and causing reactions agree appear astonish deny disagree

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

impress look (= seem) mean please

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

other

be

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

deserve

fit

include

involve

lack

matter

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

measure (= have length etc)

need

owe

own

possess

weigh (= have weight)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

belong concern consist contain depend

More details of the use of some of these verbs are given in other
entries in the book. See the Index for references.    »

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark43>>3    progressive and non-progressive uses

Compare the progressive and non-progressive uses of some of the verbs
listed above.

-    Vm feeling fine, (or I feel fine. - see 202.1)

/ feel we shouldn't do it (not Ymfeelmg we shouldnrt-do-it - feel here =
have an opinion.)

-    What are you thinking about?

What do you think of the government? (not What-are you-thinking of the
government? - think here = have an opinion.)

-    Vm seeing Leslie tomorrow.

I see what you mean, (not I'm seeing what you mean. - see here =
understand.)

-    Why are you smelling the meat? Is it bad?

Does the meat smell bad? (not Is the■ meatsmeUing-b&d? - see 535.)

-    Vm just tasting the cake to see if it's OK.

The cake tastes wonderful, (not The-cake's-tasting-wonderful - see 577.)

-    The scales broke when I was weighing myself this morning.

I weighed 68 kilos three months ago - and look at me now!

(not / was weighing 66 kilos .., - weigh here = have weight.)
Occasionally ‘non-progressive' verbs are used in progressive forms in
order to emphasise the idea of change or development.

These days, more and more people prefer / are preferring to take early
retirement The water tastes / is testing better today.

As I get older, I remember t Vm remembering less and less.

Vm liking it here more and more as time goes by.

Need, want and mean can have future or present perfect progressive uses.
Will you be needing the car this afternoon?

Vve just been invited to Sydney. It's wonderful - Vve been wanting to go
to Australia for years.

Vve been meaning to tell you about Andrew. He...

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark44>>4    can see etc

Can is often used with see_{t} hear, feel taste, smell, understand and
remember to give a kind of progressive meaning, especially in British
English. For details, see 125.

I can see Sue coming down the road Can you smell something burning?

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark45>>5    -ing forms

Even verbs which are never used in progressive tenses have -ing forms
which can be used in other kinds of structure.

Knowing her tastes_{1}1 bought her a large box of chocolates.

I don't like to go to a country without knowing something of the
language.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark46>>472    progressive (3): with always etc

We can use always, continually and similar words with a progressive form
to mean ‘very often'.

I'm always losing my keys.

Granny's nice. She's always giving people little presents.

Vm continually running into Paul these days.

That cat's forever getting shut in the bathroom.

This structure is used to talk about things which happen very often
(perhaps more often than expected), and which are unexpected or
unplanned. Compare:

-    When Alice comes to see me, I always meet her at the station.

(a regular, planned arrangement)

I'm always meeting Mrs Bailiff in the supermarket.

(accidental, unplanned meetings)

-    When I was a child, we always had picnics on Saturdays in the
summer.

(regular, planned)

Her mother was always arranging little surprise picnics and outings.
(unexpected, not regular)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark47>>473    punctuation (1):

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark48>>full stop, question mark and exclamation
mark

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark49>>1    sentence division

Full stops (AmE periods), question marks and exclamation marks (AmE
exclamation points) are used to close sentences. After one of these, a
new sentence has a capital letter.

I looked out of the window. It was snowing again.

Why do we try to reach the stars? What is it all for?

They have no right to be in our country! They must leave at once!

We do not normally put full stops, question or exclamation marks before
or after grammatically incomplete sentences.

She phoned me as soon as she arrived, (not She phoned me. As soon as she
arrived.)

In his job he has to deal with different kinds of people, (not
fn-his-jobrHe has to deal withdifferent kinds of people.)

Did you understand why I was upset? (not Bid you understand?-Why I was
upset?)

However, sometimes we can emphasise a clause or phrase by separating it
with a full stop and capital letter.

People are sleeping out on the streets. In Britain. In the 21st century.
Because there are not enough houses.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark50>>2    abbreviations

Full stops can be used after abbreviations (see 2). This is more common
in American English than in British English.

Dr. Andrew C. Burke, M.A. (or Dr Andrew C Burke, MA)    ►

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark51>>3 indirect questions

We do not use question marks after indirect questions (see 276).

I asked her what time it was. (not ..what time it was?)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark52>>474 punctuation (2): colon

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark53>>1    explanations

A colon (:) usually introduces an explanation or further details.

We decided not to go on holiday: we had too little money.

There was a problem with the car: it was losing oil.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark54>>2    lists

A colon can introduce a List.

The main points are as follows: (1) ..., (2) ..., (3) ... .

We need three kinds of support: economic, moral and political.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark55>>3    subdivisions

A colon can introduce a subdivision of a subject in a tide or heading.
punctuation: colon

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark56>>4    capitals

In British English, it is unusual for a capital letter to follow a colon
(except at the beginning of a quotation). However, this can happen if a
colon is followed by several complete sentences.

My main objections are as follows:

First of all, no proper budget has been drawn up.

Secondly, there is no guarantee that...

In American English, colons are more often followed by capital letters.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark57>>5    letters

Americans usually put a colon after the opening salutation (Dear...) in
a business letter.

Dear Mr. Callan:

I am writing to ...

British usage prefers a comma or no punctuation mark at all in this
case.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark58>>6    direct speech

Normally, direct speech is introduced by a comma in writing (see 476.9).

Stewart opened his eyes and said, "Who's your beautiful friend?'

But a long passage of direct speech may be introduced by a colon.

Introducing his report for the year, the Chairman said: ‘A number of
factors have contributed to the firm's very gratifying results. First of
all, ...'

And a colon is used when direct speech is introduced by a name or short
phrase (as in the text of a play, or when famous sayings are quoted).
polonius: What do you read, my lord? hamlet: Words, words, words.

In the words of Murphy's Law:!Anything that can go wrong will go wrong.'

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark59>>475    punctuation (3): semi-colon

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark60>>1    instead of full stops

Semi-colons (;) are sometimes used instead of full stops, in cases where
sentences are grammatically independent but the meaning is closely
connected. Semi-colons are not nearly as common as full stops or commas.
Some people work best in the mornings; others do better in the evenings.

It is a fine idea; let us hope that it is going to work.

Commas are not usually possible in cases like these (see 476).

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark61>>2    in lists

Semi-colons can also be used to separate items in a list, particularly
when these are grammatically complex.

You may use the sports facilities on condition that your subscription is
paid regularly; that you arrange for all necessary cleaning to be
carried out; that you undertake to make good any damage;...

For commas in lists, see 476.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark62>>476    punctuation (4): comma

Commas (,) generally reflect pauses in speech.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark63>>1    co-ordinate clauses

Clauses connected with and, but or or are usually separated by commas
unless they are very short. Compare:

-    Jane decided to try the home-made steak pie, and Andrew ordered
Dover sole

with boiled potatoes.

Jane had pie and Andrew had fish.

-    She had very little to live on, but she would never have dreamed of
taking

what was not hers.

She was poor but she was honest

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark64>>2    subordinate clauses

When subordinate clauses begin sentences, they are often followed by
commas. Compare:

If you are ever in London, come and see me.

Come and see me if you are ever in London.

Commas are not used before rfuzf-clauses.

It is quite natural that you should want to meet your father, (not It is
quite natural, that...)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark65>>3    grammatically separate sentences:
commas not used

We do not usually put commas between grammatically separate sentences
(in places where a full stop or a semi-colon would be possible - see 473
and 475). The blue dress was warmer. On the other hand, the purple one
was prettier. or The blue dress was warmer; on the other hand... (not
The blue dress was warmer„ on the other hand...)    »

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark66>>4    unusual word order

If words or expressions are put in unusual places or interrupt the
normal progression of a sentence, we usually separate them off by
commas.

My father, however, did not agree.

Jane had, surprisingly, paid for everything:

We were, believe it or not, in love with each other.

Andrew Carpenter, the deputy sales manager, was sick.

Two commas are necessary in these cases.

(not Andrew Carpenter the deputy-sales-memager, was sick-...)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark67>>5    adjectives

After be and other 'link verbs* (see 328), commas are always used
between adjectives.

The cowboy was tall, dark and handsome.

Before a noun, we generally use commas between adjectives which give
similar kinds of information.

This is an expensive, ill-planned, wasteful project.

Commas are sometimes dropped between short adjectives.

a taU(,) dark(,) handsome cowboy Commas cannot be dropped when
adjectives or other modifiers refer to different parts of something.

a green, red and gold carpet (not a green-red-...) concrete, glass and
plastic buildings Commas are not normally used before a noun when
adjectives give different kinds of information.

Have you met our handsome new financial director? (not .. .-our
kandsome,-newy financiab-direetor?)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark68>>6    identifying expressions: commas not
used

When nouns are followed by identifying expressions which show exactly
who or what is being talked about, commas are not used. Compare:

-    The driver in the Ferrari was cornering superbly: (The phrase in
the Ferrari

identifies the driver.)

(not The driver, in the Ferranj-ims-eornering superbly or The driver in
the Ferrari> was cornering superbly.)

Stephens, in the Ferrari, was cornering superbly. (The phrase in the
Ferrari does not identify the driver; he is already identified by his
name, Stephens.)

-    The woman who was talking on the phone gave Parker a big smile.

Mrs Grange, who was talking on the phone, gave Parker a big smile.

For more about identifying and non-identifying relative clauses, see
495.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark69>>7    long subjects: commas not used

We do not usually put a comma after a subject, even if it is very long.

The man from the Japanese Ministry of Education arrived early.

(not The man from thejapartese Minstry of-Educationr-arrived early.)
What we need most of all is more time. (not What we need most of all,
is...)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark70>>8    lists

We can use commas to separate items in a series or list. A comma is not
usually used with and between the last two items unless these are long.
Compare:

I went to Spain, Italy, Switzerland, Austria and Germany:

You had a holiday at Christinas, at New Year and at Easter.

I spent yesterday playing cricket, listening to jazz records_{t} and
talking about the meaning of life.

For semi-colons in lists, see 475.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark71>>9    direct speech

A comma is generally used between a reporting expression and a piece of
direct speech.

He said, *There's no way we can help her'.

If a reporting expression follows a piece of direct speech, we usually
put a comma instead of a full stop before the closing quotation mark.

7 don't like this one bit/ said Julia.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark72>>10    indirect speech: no comma before that
etc

We do not put commas before that, what, where etc in indirect speech
structures.

Everybody realised that I was a foreigner. (not Everybody realised,
that...) They quickly explained what to do. (not They-quickly explained,
what...) I didn't know where I should go. (not I didn't know, where...)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark73>>11    numbers

Commas are used to divide large numbers into groups of three figures, by
separating off the thousands and millions.

6,435 (not &435) 7,456,189 We do not always use commas in four-figure
numbers, and they are never used in dates.

3,164 or 3164 the year 1946 Spaces are sometimes used instead of commas.

There are 1 000 millimetres in one metre.

We do not use commas in decimals (see 389.1).

3.5 = three point five OR three and a half (not 3,5 three comma five)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark74>>477 punctuation (5): dash

Dashes (-) are especially common in informal writing. They can be used
in the same way as colons, semi-colons or brackets.

There are three things I can never remember - names, faces, and I've
forgotten the other.

We had a great time in Greece - the kids really loved it.

My mother - who rarely gets angry - really lost her temper.    >

A dash can introduce an afterthought, or something unexpected and
surprising.

We'll be arriving on Monday morning - at least, I think so.

And then we met Bob - with Lisa, believe it or not!

For the use of hyphens (as in hard-working or co-operative), see 559.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark75>>478    punctuation (6): quotation marks

Quotation marks can be single (‘...') or double ("..."). They are also
called ‘inverted commas* in British English.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark76>>1    direct speech

We use quotation marks (single or double) when we quote direct speech.
For quotations inside quotations, we use double quotation marks inside
single (or single inside double).

‘His last words/ said Albert, ‘were “Close that bloody window”.'

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark77>>2    special use of words

We often put quotation marks (usually single) round words which are used
in special ways - for example when we talk about them, when we use them
as titles, or when we give them special meanings.

People disagree about how to use the word ^{4}disinterested\

His next book was 'Heart of Darkness\

A textbook can be a 'wall' between the teacher and the class.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark78>>479    punctuation (7): apostrophe
/a'postrefi:/

We use apostrophes 0 for three main reasons.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark79>>1    missing letters

Apostrophes replace letters in contracted forms (see 143). can't (=
cannot) I'd (= I would/had) it's (= it is/has) who's who is/has)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark80>>2    possessives

We use apostrophes before or after possessive -s (see 439).

the girl's father Charles's wife my parents' house Possessive
determiners and pronouns (e.g. yours, its) do not have apostrophes. This
money is yours. (not ... your's.)

The cat had not had its food yet. (not .. .-it's food ...)

Whose house did she stay in? (not Who's...)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark81>>3    special plurals

Words which do not usually have plurals sometimes have an apostrophe
when a plural form is written.

It is a nice idea, but there are a lot of if s.

Apostrophes are used in the plurals of letters, and sometimes of numbers
and abbreviations.

He writes b's instead of d^{f}s.

It was in the early 1960's. (More usually: ... 1960s.)

I know two MP's personally. (More usually: .., MPs.)

It is not correct to put apostrophes in normal plurals.

JEANS - HALF PRICE (NOT JEAN'S . . .)

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark82>>480 questions (1): basic rules

These rules apply to most written and spoken questions. For ‘declarative
questions* like This is your car? (in which the subject comes before the
verb), see 481.

<<main-30.xhtml#bookmark83>>1    auxiliary verb before subject: Have
you...?

In a question, an auxiliary verb normally comes before the subject.

When is Oliver leaving? (not When Oliver is leaving?)

Have you received my letter of June 17? (not Youhave received-...?)

Why are you laughing? (not Why yeu -are laughing?)

What are all those people looking at? (not What aU-those people are
looking at?)

How much does the room cost? (not How much the-room costs?)

<<main-31.xhtml>>

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    do: Do you like ...?

If there is no other auxiliary verb, we use do, does or did to form a
question. Do you like Mozart? (not Like-you Mozart?)

What does 'periphrastic^{1} mean? (not What means\^periphrastic'?)

Did you wash the car today?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    do not used with other auxiliaries

Do is not used together with other auxiliary verbs or with be.

Can you tell me the time? (not Do you-carHell me the time?)

Have you seen John? (not Bo you have seen-John?)

Are you ready?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark2>>4    infinitive after do: What does he want?

After do, we use the infinitive (without to).

What does the boss want? (not Whahdoes the boss wants?)

Did you go climbing last weekend? (not Bid-you went...? or Bid you to go
...?)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark3>>5    only auxiliary verb before subject

Only the auxiliary verb goes before the subject, not the whole of the
verb.

Is your mother coming tomorrow? (not Is-eoming your mother tomorrow?) Is
your daughter having a lesson today? (not Is having your daughter...?)
When was your reservation made? (not When was made your reservation?)
This happens even if the subject is very long.

Where are the President and his family staying? (not Where are staying
the President...?)    ►

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark4>>6    Who phoned? / Who did you phone?

When who, which, what or whose is the subject (or part of the subject),
do is not normally used. Compare:

-    Who phoned? (Who is the subject.)

Who did you phone? (Who is the object.)

-    What happened? (What is the subject.)

What did she say? (What is the object.)

More examples:

Which costs more - the blue one or the grey one? (not Wkieh
d&es-eost-more-...?)

Which type of battery lasts longest? (not Wkieh'type of battery docs
last

W/ffgCoI ? }

How many people work in your office? (not How many people do work...?)
But do can be used after a subject question word for emphasis, to insist
on an answer.

Well, tell us - what did happen when your father found you?

So who did marry the Princess in the end?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark5>>7    indirect questions: Tell me when you are
leaving

In an indirect question, we do not put an auxiliary before the subject,
and we do not use a question mark. For details, see 276.

Tell me when you are leaving. (not TeH-me-when-are-you leaving?)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark6>>8    prepositions: What are you talking
about?

Prepositions often come at the end of \^-questions, separated from their
objects. (For details, see 452.)

What are you talking about? (not About what are you-talking?)

Who did you buy the ticket from?

What did you clean the floor with?

For negative questions, see 368.

For ellipsis in questions (e.g. Seen John? Coming tonight?), see 179.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark7>>481 questions (2): declarative questions

In spoken questions, we do not always use ‘interrogative' word order.

You're working late tonight?

These ‘declarative questions' are often used when the speaker thinks
he/she knows or has understood something, but wants to make sure or
express surprise. A rising intonation is common.

This is your car? (= I suppose this is your car, isn't it?)

That's the boss? I thought he was the cleaner.

We're going to Hull for our holidays. ~ You're going to Hull?

This word order is not normally possible after a question word.

Where are you going? (not Where you are going?)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark8>>482    questions (3): rhetorical questions

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark9>>1    questions that do not expect an answer

Questions do not always ask for information. In many languages, a
question with an obvious answer can be used simply as a way of drawing
attention to something. Questions of this kind are called ‘rhetorical
questions'.

Do you know what time it is? (= You're late.)

Who's a lovely baby? (= You're a lovely baby.)

I can't find my coat. ~ What's this, then? (= Here it is, stupid.)

Very often, a rhetorical question draws attention to a negative
situation - the answer is obviously No, or there is no answer to the
question.

What's the use of asking her? (= It's no use asking her.)

How do you expect me to find milk on a Sunday night? Where am I going to
find a shop open? (= You can't reasonably expect... There aren't any
shops open.)

Where's my money? (= You haven't paid me.)

I can run faster than you. ~ Who cares? (= Nobody cares.)

Are we going to let them do this to us? (= We aren't...)

Have you lost your tongue? (= Why don't you say anything?)

What do you think you're doing? (= You can't justify what you're doing.)
Who do you think you are? (= You aren't as important as your behaviour
suggests.)

Why don't you take a taxi? (= There's no reason not to.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark10>>2    Why/How should...?

Why should ...? can be used aggressively to reject suggestions, requests
and instructions.

Ann's very unhappy. --- Why should 1 care?

Could your wife help us in the office tomorrow? ~ Why should she? She
doesn't work for you.

How should/would I know? is an aggressive reply to a question.

What time does the film start? ~ How should I know?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark11>>3    negative yes/no questions

Negative yes/no questions (see 368) often suggest that the speaker wants
the answer Yes, or some other positive response.

Haven't I done enough for you? (= I have done enough for you.)

Didn't I tell you it would rain? (= I told you ...)

Don't touch that! ~ Why shouldn't I? (= I have a perfect right to.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark12>>483    questions (4): echo questions

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark13>>1 You're getting married?

To question what has been said, a speaker may simply repeat (‘echo')
what he/she has heard. A rising intonation is common.

I'm getting married. ~ You're getting married?    ►

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark14>>2    Take a look at what?

To question one part of a sentence; we can repeat the rest of the
sentence, and put a stressed question word in place of the part we are
asking about Just take a look at that. ~ Take a look at what?

She's invited thirteen people to dinner. ~ She's invited how many?

We're going to Tierra del Fuego on holiday. ~ You're going where?

I've broken the fettle gauge. ~ You've broken the what?

To question a verb, or the part of a sentence beginning with the verb,
do what is used.

She set fire to the garage. ~ She did what (to the garage)?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark15>>3    repeating a question

A speaker may question a question, by repeating it with a rising
intonation. Note that we use normal question structures with inverted
word order, not indirect question structures, in this case.

Where are you going?~ Where am I going? Home. (not ... Where-Fm
going?-...)

What does he want?~ What does he want? Money; as usual, (not .. .-What
he wants?...)

Are you tired? ~ Am I tired? Of course not (not ... Whether Fm
tired?...) Do squirrels eat insects?Do squirrels eat insects? I'm not
sure.

(not ... Whether squirrels-eat-msects?-...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark16>>484 questions (5): reply questions (Was it?
Did you?)

Short questions are often used in conversation to show that the listener
is paying attention and interested. They are constructed with auxiliary
verb + pronoun, like question tags (see 487).

It was a terrible party. ~ Was it? ~ Yes ...

Note that these questions do not ask for information - they simply show
that the listener is reacting to what has been said. More examples:

We had a lovely holiday. ~ Did you?~ Yes, we went...

I've got a headache. ~ Have you, dear? I'll get you an aspirin.

John likes that girl next door. ~ Oh, does he?

I don't understand. ~ Don't you? I'm sorry.

Negative questions in reply to affirmative statements express emphatic
agreement (like negative-question exclamations - see 195.4).

It was a lovely concert. ~ Yes, wasn't it? I did enjoy it.

She's put on a lot of weight ~ Yes, hasn't she?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark17>>485    questions (6): question-word clauses

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark18>>1    question-word clauses as objects

Clauses beginning with question words can refer both to questions and to
the answers to questions. They often act as the objects of verbs - for
example, when questions and their answers are reported (see 276).

1 asked who wanted to come.

She wondered why he wasn't wearing a coat We need to decide where Ann's
going to sleep.

He told me when he was arriving; but I've forgotten.

She explained what the problem was.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark19>>2    other uses

Question-word clauses can act not only as objects, but also as subjects,
complements or adverbials. This structure is often rather informal
(especially with how-clauses - see 252).

Who you invite is your business. A hot bath is what I need.

Where we stay doesn't matter. This is how much Vve done.

Vm surprised at how fast she can run.

You can eat it how you like. (very informal)

The 'preparatory it* structure is often used with subject clauses (see
446).

It's your business who you invite. It doesn't matter where we stay.
Question-word clauses can give more information about nouns. In this
case they are called 'relative clauses* (see 494-498 for details).

There's that man who threw stones at your dog.

The place where Mary works has just had afire.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark20>>486    questions (7): that-clauses

A wh-question usually refers to the main clause which starts with the
question word. However, questions can also refer to subordinate
tfiar-clauses after verbs like wish, think or say.

Who do you wish (that) you^{f}d married, then?

How long do you think (that) we should wait?

What did you say (that) you wanted for Christmas?

That is usually dropped; it must be dropped when the question word
refers to the subject of the subordinate clause.

Who do you think is outside? (not Who do you think that is outside?)
What do you suppose will happen now? (not What do you suppose that will
happen now?)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark21>>487    question tags (1): basic information

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark22>>1 What are question tags?

‘Question tags' are the small questions that often come at the ends of
sentences in speech, and sometimes in informal writing.

The film wasn't very good, was it?    »>

Negatives are usually contracted. Full forms are possible in formal
speech. That's the postman, isn't it? You take sugar in tea, don't you?

They promised to repay us within six months, did they not? (formal)
Question tags can be used to check whether something is true, or to ask
for agreement.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark23>>2    negative after affirmative, and vice
versa

Question tags are used after affirmative and negative sentences, but not
after questions.

You're the new secretary, aren't you?

You^{f}re not the new secretary, are you?

(but not Areyouthe-new secretary; arer& yett?)

To check information or ask for agreement, we most often put negative
tags after affirmative sentences, and non-negative tags after negative
sentences.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

It's cold, isn't it?

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

It's not warm, is it?

For ‘same-way' tags, see 488.7

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark24>>3    auxiliaries

If the main sentence has an auxiliary verb (or non-auxiliary be), this
is repeated in the question tag.

Harry gave you a cheque, didn't he?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark25>>4    negative words

Non-negative tags are used after sentences containing negative words
like never, no, nobody, hardly, scarcely and little.

You never say what you're thinking, do you? (not .. .-do&t you?)

It's no good, is it? (not ... isn't it?)

It's hardly rained at all this summer, has it?

There's little we can do about it, is there?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark26>>5    meaning and intonation

In speech, we can show the exact meaning of a question tag by the
intonation. If the tag is a real question - if we really want to know
something and are not sure of the answer - we use a rising intonation:
the voice goes up.

The meeting's at four o'clock, isn't it?

If the tag is not a real question - if we are sure of the answer - we
use a falling intonation: the voice goes down.

It's a beautiful day, isn't it?

In writing, the exact meaning of a question tag is normally clear from
the context.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark27>>6    requests

We often ask for help or information by using the structure negative
statement + question tag.

You couldn't lend me a pound, could you?

You haven't seen my watch anywhere, have you?

For details of other kinds of tags, see 514.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark28>>488 question tags (2): advanced points

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark29>>1    aren't I?

The question tag for / am is aren't I?

I'm late, aren't I?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark30>>2    imperatives

After imperatives, won't you? can be used to invite people politely to
do things (especially in British English).

Come in, won't you?

Will/would/can/could you? can all be used to tell or ask people to do
things.

Give me a hand, will you? Open a window, would you?

Can't you expresses impatience.

Shut up, can't you?

After a negative imperative, we use will you?

Don't forget, will you?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark31>>5    it and they with nothing, nobody,
somebody etc

We use it in question tags to refer to nothing and everything.

Nothing can happen, can it?

We use they (see 528) to refer to nobody, somebody and everybody (and no
one etc).

Nobody phoned, did they?

Somebody wanted a drink, didn't they? Who was it?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark32>>6    non-auxiliary have

After non-auxiliary have (referring to states), question tags with have
and do are often both possible. (Do is normal in American English.)

Your father has a bad back_{t} hasn't/doesn't he?

For more about the use of do with have, see 236-239.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark33>>7    'same-way' question tags: You're
getting married, are you?

Non-negative question tags are quite common after affirmative sentences.
These are often used as responses to something that has been said, like
‘reply questions' (see 484): the speaker repeats what he/she has just
heard or learnt, and uses the tag to express interest, surprise, concern
or some other reaction. So you're getting married, are you? How nice!

So she thinks she's going to become a doctor, does she? Well, well.

You think you're funny, do you?

‘Same-way' tags can also be used to ask questions. In this structure, we
use the main sentence to make a guess, and then ask (in the tag) if it
was correct. Your mother's at home, is she? This is the last bus, is it?

You can eat shellfish, can you?

Ill... shall I? can be used to make offers.

Ill hold that for you, shall I?

Negative ‘same-way* tags are occasionally heard; they usually sound
aggressive.

I see. You don't like my cooking don't you?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark34>>8    ellipsis: Nice day, isn't it?

In sentences with question tags, it is quite common to leave out pronoun
subjects and auxiliary verbs. (This is called ‘ellipsis'. For details,
see 179.)

(It's a) nice day, isn't it? (She was) talking to my husband, was she?

In very informal speech, a question tag can sometimes be used after a
question with ellipsis.

Have a good time, did you?    Your mother at home, is she?

John be here tomorrow, will he?

For details of other kinds of tags, see 514.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark35>>9    I (don't) think

Note the use of question tags in sentences beginning with I (don't)
think and similar expressions (see 179).

I think he's Norwegian, isn't he? (not ... don't I?)

I don't think it will rain, will it? (not .. . do I?)

I suppose you're hungry, aren't you?

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark36>>489 quite

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark37>>1    two meanings

Quite has two meanings. Compare:

It's quite good, but it could be better. (= It's OK, not bad.)

It's quite impossible. (= It's completely impossible.)

Good is a ‘gradable* adjective: things can be more or less good. With
gradable words, quite usually means something like ‘fairly' or ‘rather'
(see 199) in affirmative sentences. Impossible is non-gradable: things
are either impossible or not; but they cannot be more or less
impossible. With non-gradable words, quite means ‘completely'. Compare:

-    I'm quite tired, but I can walk a bit further.

Vm quite exhausted - I couldn't walk another step.

-    It's quite surprising,, (similar to fairly surprising)

It's quite amazing. (= absolutely amazing)

-    He speaks French quite well, but he's got a strong English accent.

He speaks French quite perfectly.

-    I quite like her, but she's not one of my closest friends.

Have you quite finished? (= Have you completely finished?)

In American English quite with gradable adjectives often means something
like ‘very', not ‘fairly/rather'.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    word order with nouns

Quite can be used with a/an + noun. It normally comes before a/an if
there is a gradable adjective or no adjective.

It's quite a nice day:

We watched quite an interesting film last night.

She's quite a woman! The party was quite a success.

With non-gradable adjectives, quite normally comes after a/an in BrE.

It was a quite perfect day. (AmE It was quite a perfect day.)

Quite is sometimes used before the to mean ‘exactly*, ‘completely'.

He's going quite the wrong way. quite the opposite

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    comparisons

Quite is not used directly before comparatives.

She's rather / much / a bit older than me. (but not She's quite
older...) But we use quite better to mean ‘completely recovered' (from
an illness). Quite similar means ‘fairly/rather similar^{1}; quite
different means ‘completely different'.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark40>>4    quite a bit/few/lot etc

Quite a bit and quite a few (informal) mean almost the same as quite a
lot. We're having quite a bit of trouble with the kids just now.

We thought nobody would be there, but actually quite a few people came.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark41>>5    not quite

Not quite means ‘not completely' or ‘not exactly'. It can be used before
adjectives, adverbs, verbs and nouns, including nouns with the.

Tm not quite ready ~ won't be a minute.

She didn't run quite fast enough for a record.

I don't quite agree. That's not quite the colour I wanted.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark42>>490    rather: adverb of degree (rather
good, etc)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark43>>1    meaning

Rather can be used as an adverb of degree. The meaning is similar to
‘quite' or 'fairly*, but more emphatic (see 199). This use of rather is
less common in American English.

The film was rather good.    Some people rather like being miserable.

It's rather later than I thought. I rather think we're going to lose.
Rather often suggests ‘more than is usual', ‘more than was expected',
‘more than is wanted' and similar ideas.

How was the film? \^Rather good -1 was surprised

She sings rather well - people often think she's a professional.

It's rather warm in here. Let's open a window.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark44>>2    word order with articles

Rather generally comes before articles, but can also come after a/an if
there is an adjective.

That's rather the impression I wanted to give.

He's rather a fool.

Jane's had rather a good idea, (or Jane's had a rather good idea.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark45>>3    plural nouns

Rather is not normally used before a plural noun with no adjective.

(not They're rather fools.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark46>>491    rather: preference

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark47>>1    rather than

This expression is normally used in ‘parallel' structures: for example
with two adjectives, adverbs, nouns, infinitives or -ing forms.

I'd call her hair chestnut rather than brown.

I'd prefer to go in August rather than in July.

We ought to invest in machinery rather than buildings.

I prefer starting early rather than leaving things to the last minute.

When the main clause has a to-infinitive, rather than is usually
followed by an infinitive without to or an -ing form.

I decided to write rather than phone/phoning.

Rather than use/using the last of my cash, I decided to write a cheque.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    would rather

This expression means ‘would prefer to', and is followed by the
infinitive without to. We often use the contraction'd rather.

Would you rather stay here or go home?

How about a drink? \^ I'd rather have something to eat.

The negative is would rather not.

Yd rather not go out tonight, (not I wouidr\^t-rather-...)

Note that would rather like does not mean ‘would prefer'; in this
expression, rather means ‘quite*, and does not suggest preference.
Compare:

I'd rather like a cup of coffee. (= I'd quite like ...)

- Oh, would you? I'd rather have a glass of beer. (= I'd prefer ...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark49>>3    would rather: past tense with present
or future meaning

We can use would rather to say that a person would prefer somebody to do
something. We use a special structure with a past tense.

would rather + subject + past tense I'd rather you went home now.

Tomorrow's difficult I'd rather you came next weekend.

My wife would rather we didn't see each other any more.

Shall I open a window? ~ Yd rather you didn't A present tense or present
subjunctive is possible (e.g. I'd rather he goes / he go home now), but
unusual. To talk about past actions, a past perfect tense is possible.

Vd rather you hadn't done that However, this kind of idea is usually
expressed with I wish (see 630).

/ wish you hadn't done that In older English, had rather was used in the
same way as would rather. This structure is still found in grammars, but
it is not normally used.

For other structures where a past tense has a present or future meaning,
see 426.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark50>>4    or rather

People often use or rather to correct themselves.

He's a psychologist - or rather, a psychoanalyst (not .. .-or-betterr#
psychoanalyst)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark51>>5    would rather and had better

Note that would rather (= would prefer) is not the same as had better (=
should) - see 230. Compare:

I suppose I'd better clean the windows, but Yd rather watch TV.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark52>>492 reason

The preposition for is used both before and after reason.

What's the real reason for your depression? (not ... reason of your
depression?)

I need to talk to you for two reasons.

Reason can be followed by a clause beginning why... or that....

The reason why I came here was to be with my family.

Do you know the reason that they're closing the factory?

In an informal style, why/that is often left out.

The reason she doesn't like me is that I make her nervous.

Some people consider it incorrect to use a because-clause as a
complement after reason (as in Sorry I'm late - the reason is because I
overslept.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark53>>493 reflexive pronouns

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark54>>1    What are reflexive pronouns?

Reflexive pronouns are myself, yourself himself herself, itself oneself
ourselves, yourselves_{f} themselves.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    use: I cut myself shaving

A common use of reflexive pronouns is to talk about actions where the
subject and object are the same person.

I cut myself shaving this morning, (not f-ettf-me-.. .)

We got out of the water and dried ourselves. (not ... dried us.)

Vm going to the shops to get myself some tennis shoes.

Talking to oneself is the first sign of madness.

Reflexive pronouns can also refer to possessives and objects.

His letters are all about himself

Vm going to tell her a few facts about herself

I love you for yourself not for your money.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark56>>3    after prepositions: She took her dog
with her

After prepositions of place, we often use a personal pronoun (me, you
etc) if the meaning is clear without using a reflexive. Compare:

She took her dog with her (not .. .-with herself She could hardly take
her dog with somebody else.)

She's very pleased with herself (She could be pleased with somebody
else.) Other examples:

Close the door after you. He was pulling a small cart behind him.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark57>>4    emphatic use: Do it yourself

We can use reflexives as emphasisers, to mean ‘that person /thing and
nobody/ nothing else'.

It's quicker if you do it yourself The manageress spoke to me herself
The house itself is nice, but the garden's very small Vll go and see the
President himself if I have to.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark58>>5    reflexives used instead of personal
pronouns

Reflexives are sometimes used instead of personal pronouns after as,
like, but (for) and except (for).

These shoes are designed for heavy runners like yourself (or ... like
you.) Everybody was early except myself (or ... except me.)

Reflexives can also be used instead of personal pronouns in co-ordinated
noun phrases.

There will be four of us at dinner: Robert, Alison, Jenny and myself.

(or ... and I/nte.)

People often feel that these uses are fussy - too exact and unnecessary.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark59>>6    by oneself

By myself/yourself etc means 'alone, without company' or ‘without help*.

I often like to spend time by myself

Do you need help? ~ No, thanks. I can do it by myself

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark60>>7    -selves and each other / one another

Note the difference between -selves and each other / one another (see
171). They talk to themselves a lot. (Each of them talks to
him/herself.)

They talk to each other a lot. (Each of them talks to the other.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark61>>8    own

There are no possessive reflexives. Instead, we use my own, your own
etc.

I always type my own letters, (not ... myself'$ letter#)

The children have both got their own rooms

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark62>>9    reflexives not used

Certain verbs (e.g. wash, dress, shave) have reflexive pronouns in some
languages but not in English.

Do you shave on Sundays? (not Do you shave yourself-on-Sundays?)
However, reflexives can be used if it is necessary to make it clear who
does the action.

She's old enough to dress herself now.

The barber shaves all the people in the town who don't shave themselves.
So does he shave himself or not?

Some other verbs which do not normally have reflexive pronouns:

Suddenly the door opened. (not Suddenly the door-opened itself.)

His book's selling well, (not His-boob's selling itself well.)

Try to concentrate, (not Try to concentrate yourself.)

I feel strange, (not I feel myself strange.)

Hurry! (not Hurry yourself!)

For more about structures like The door opened and His book's selling
well, see 609.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark63>>494 relatives (1): basic information

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark64>>1    relative clauses: the people who live
next door

Clauses beginning with question words (e.g. who, which, where) are often
used to modify nouns and some pronouns - to identify people and things,
or to give more information about them. Clauses used like this are
called ‘relative clauses*.

Do you know the people who live next door?

Those who want tickets can get them from the office.

There's a programme tonight which you might like.

He lives in a village where there are no shops.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark65>>2    relative pronouns: who, whom, which

When who, whom and which introduce relative clauses, they are called
‘relative pronouns'. Who(m) refers to people and which to things.

What's the name of the tall man who just came in? (not ... the tall man
which...)

It's a book which will interest children of all ages. (not ... a book
who ...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark66>>3    subject and object

Who and which can be the subjects of verbs in relative clauses.

I like people who smile a lot.

This is the key which opens the garage,    ►

Who(m) and which can also be the objects of verbs in relative clauses.
Whom is unusual in an informal style (see 623).

Do you remember the people who we met in Italy? (Who is the object of
met.)

I forget most of the films which I see. (Which is the object of see.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark67>>4    that = who/which

We often use that instead of who or which, especially in an informal
style.

I like people that smile a lot.

This is the key that opens the garage.

Do you remember the people that we met in Italy?

I forget most of the films that I see.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark68>>5    all that, only... that etc

That is especially common after quantifiers like all every(thing)_{t}
some(thing), any (thing), no(thing)_{t} none, little, few, much,,
only_{t} and after superlatives.

Is this all that's left? (More natural than ... all which is left?)

Have you got anything that belongs to me? (More natural than ...
anything which .. 0

The only thing that matters is to find our way home.

I hope the little that I've done has been useful

It's the best film that's ever been made about madness.

Note that what (see 497) cannot be used in these cases.

All that you say is certainly true, (not AH- what you say...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark69>>6    leaving out object pronouns: the people
we met

Object pronouns can often be left out.

Do you remember the people we met in Italy?

I forget most of the films I see.    All I want is your happiness.

This is not possible in all relative clauses: see 495.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark70>>7    one subject or object is enough

As subjects or objects, who(m)_{t} which and that replace words like
she_{t} him or it. one subject or object in a relative clause is enough.
Compare:

-    He's got a new girlfriend. She works in a garage.

He's got a new girlfriend who works in a garage, (not ... who she works
in a garage:)

-    This is Mr Rogers. You met him last year.

This is Mr Rogers, whom you met last year, (not ... whom you met him
last yearr)

-    Here's an article. It might interest you.

Here's an article which might interest you. (not .. . which it might
interest yott)

-    I've found the car keys. You were looking for them.

I've found the car keys that you were looking for. (not ... that you
were booking for them.)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark71>>8    whose: a girl whose hair...

Whose is a possessive relative pronoun, used as a determiner before
nouns. It replaces his! her! its. For more details, see 496.

I saw a girl whose hair came down to her waist, (not ... whose her hair
come-down-...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark72>>9    which referring to a whole clause

Which can refer not only to a noun, but also to the whole of a previous
clause. Note that what cannot be used in this way.

He got married again a year later, which surprised everybody. (not ...
,what surprised everybody:)

She cycled from London to Glasgow, which is pretty good for a woman of
75. (not She cycled..., what is-pretty-good...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark73>>10 relative when, where and why

When and where can introduce relative clauses after nouns referring to
time and place. They are used in the same way as preposition + which.

Ill never forget the day when I first met you. (= ... the day on which
...) Do you know a shop where I can find sandals? (= ... a shop at which
...) Why is used in a similar way after reason.

Do you know the reason why she doesn't like me? (= ... the reason for
which ...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark74>>495 relatives (2):

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark75>>identifying and non-identifying clauses

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark76>>1    two kinds of relative clause

Some relative clauses identify or classify nouns: they tell us which
person or thing, or which kind of person or thing, is meant. (In
grammars, these are called 'identifying', ‘defining' or ‘restrictive'
relative clauses.)

What's the name of the tall man who just came in?

People who take physical exercise live longer.

Who owns the car which is parked outside?

Have you got something that will get ink out of a carpet?

Other relative clauses do not identify or classify; they simply tell us
more about a person or thing that is already identified. (In grammars,
these are called ‘non-identifying', 'non-defining' or ‘non-restrictive'
relative clauses.)

This is Ms Rogers, who's joining the firm next week.

In 1908 Ford developed his Model T car, which sold for $500.

There are several grammatical differences between the two kinds of
relative clause. There are also stylistic differences: non-identifying
clauses are generally more formal, and are less frequent in informal
speech.

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark77>>2    pronunciation and punctuation

Identifying relative clauses usually follow immediately after the nouns
that they modify, without a break: they are not separated by pauses or
intonation movements in speech, or by commas in writing. (This is
because the noun would be incomplete without the relative clause, and
the sentence would ►

make no sense or have a different meaning.) Non-identifying clauses are
normally separated by pauses and/or intonation breaks and commas.
Compare:

-    The woman who does my hair has moved to another hairdresser's.

Dorothy, who does my hair, has moved to another hairdresser's.

-    She married a man that she met on a bus

She married a very nice young architect from Belfast, whom she met on a
bus

Note how the identifying clauses cannot easily be left out.

The woman has moved to another hairdresser's. (Which woman?)

She married a man. (!)

When a non-identifying clause does not come at the end of a sentence,
two commas are necessary.

Dorothy, who does my hair, has moved... (not Dorothy, who does my-hair
has moved...)

<<main-31.xhtml#bookmark78>>3    use of that

That is common as a relative pronoun in identifying clauses. In
nonidentifying clauses, that is unusual. Compare:

-    Have you got a book which/that is really easy to read?

I lent him The Old Man and the Sea', which is really easy to read.

(not ... 'The Old Man and-the Sea^{1},-that -i$-really easy-to read.)

-    Where's the girl who/that sells the tickets?

This is Naomi who sells the tickets, (not This is Naomi, that sells the
tickets.)

<<main-32.xhtml>>

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark0>>4    leaving out object pronouns

In identifying relative clauses, we often leave out object pronouns,
especially in an informal style. In non-identifying clauses this is not
possible. Compare:

-    I feel sorry for the man she married.

She met my brother, whom she later married, (not She met my brother, she
later married.)

-    Did you like the wine we drank last night?

I poured him a glass of wine, which he drank at once, (not / poured him
a glass of wine, he drank at once.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark1>>496 relatives (3): whose

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark2>>1 relative possessive

Whose is a relative possessive word, used as a determiner before nouns
in the same way as his, her, its or their. It can refer back to people
or things. In a relative clause, whose + noun can be the subject, the
object of a verb or the object of a preposition.

I saw a girl whose beauty took my breath away, (subject)

It was a meeting whose purpose I did not understand. (object)

Michel Croz, with whose help Whymper climbed the Matterhorn, was one of
the first professional guides, (object of preposition)

I went to see my friends the Forrests, whose children I used to look
after when they were small, (object of preposition)

Whose can be used in both identifying and non-identifying clauses.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark3>>2    things: of which; that ...of

Instead of whose, we can use of which or that... o/(less formal) to
refer to things, and these are sometimes preferred. The most common word
order is noun + of which or that ...of but of which... + noun is also
possible. Compare the following four ways of expressing the same idea.

He's written a book whose name Vve forgotten.

He's written a book the name of which I've forgotten.

He's written a book that Vve forgotten the name of He's written a book
of which I've forgotten the name.

We do not normally use noun + of whom in a possessive sense to talk
about people.

a man whose name I've forgotten (not a man of whom I've forgotten the
name)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark4>>3    only used as a determiner

Relative whose is only used as a possessive determiner, before a noun.
In other cases we use of which! whom or that ...of

He's married to a singer of whom you may have heard, or ... that you may
have heard of. (not .. .-atsinger whose you may have heard.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark5>>4    formality

Sentences with whose are generally felt to be rather heavy and formal;
in an informal style other structures are often preferred. With (see
631) is a common way of expressing possessive ideas, and is usually more
natural than whose in descriptions.

I've got some friends with a house that looks over a river.

(Less formal than ... whose house looks over a river.)

You know that girl with a brother who drives lorries?

(Less formal than ... whose brother drives lorries?)

She's married to the man over there with the enormous ears.

(More natural than ... the man over there whose ears are enormous.)

For whose in questions, see 626.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark6>>497 relatives (4): what

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark7>>1 meaning and use: the thing(s) which

What does not refer to a noun that comes before it. It acts as noun +
relative pronoun together, and means ‘the thing(s) which*. Clauses
beginning with what can act as subjects, objects, or complements after
be.

What she said made me angry. (subject of made)

I hope you're going to give me what I need, (object of give)

This is exactly what I wanted, (complement)

For singular and plural verbs after what (e.g. What we need most istare
books), see 529. »

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark8>>2    what not used

What is only used to mean ‘the thing(s) which'. It cannot be used as an
ordinary relative pronoun after a noun or pronoun.

We haven't got everything that you ordered. (not ...
everything-what-...) The only thing that keeps me awake is coffee, (not
The only thing-wkat-...) We use which, not what, to refer to a whole
clause that comes before (see 494.9).

Sally married Joe, which made Paul very unhappy, (not ... what made...)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark9>>3    what as a determiner

What can also be used as a determiner with a noun.

What money he has comes from his family. (= The money that he has ...)
I'll give you what help I can. (= ... any help that I can.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark10>>498 relatives (5): advanced points

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark11>>1    double use of relative pronouns

Note that relative pronouns have a double use: they act as subjects or
objects inside relative clauses, and at the same time they connect
relative clauses to nouns or pronouns in other clauses - rather like
conjunctions.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark12>>2    relative pronouns as general-purpose
connectors

In non-identifying clauses, the pronouns who and which sometimes act as
general-purpose connecting words, rather like and + pronoun.

She passed the letter to Moriarty, who passed it on to me. (= ... and he
passed it on ...)

I dropped the saucepan, which knocked over the eggs, which went all over
the floor. [= ... and it knocked ... and they went...)

I do a lot of walking, which keeps me fit. [=... and this keeps me fit.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark13>>3    who and whom

Who can be used as an object in identifying clauses in an informal
style. Whom is more formal.

The woman who I marry will have a good sense of humour.

(More formal: The woman whom I marry...)

In non-identifying clauses, who is less common as an object, though it
is sometimes used in an informal style.

In that year he met Rachel, whom he was later to marry.

(or ... Rachel, who he was later to marry. - informal)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark14>>4    that for people

That is often used in identifying relative clauses instead of who! whom!
which (see 494.4). That is most common as an object, or as a subject
instead of which. That can be used as a subject instead of who, but this
is quite informal. Compare:

the people that I invited (normal) the books that I lent you (normal)
the bus that crashed (normal)

the people that live next door (informal; the people who... is preferred
in a less informal style)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark15>>5    which as determiner; in which case

Which can be used as a determiner in relative clauses, with a general
noun which repeats the meaning of what came before. This structure is
rather formal, and is mainly used after prepositions, especially in some
fixed phrases like in which case and at which point.

She may be late, in which case we ought to wait for her.

He lost his temper, at which point I decided to go home.

He was appointed Lord Chancellor, in which post he spent the rest of his
life. He spoke in Greek, which language I could only follow with
difficulty.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark16>>6    when, where etc replaced by that or
dropped

After common nouns referring to time, when is often replaced by that or
dropped in an informal style.

Come and see us any time (that) you're in town.

M never forget the day (that) we met That was the year (that) I first
went abroad.

The same thing happens with where after somewhere, anywhere, everywhere,
nowhere and place (but not after other words).

Have you got somewhere (that) I can lie down for an hour?

We need a place (that) we can stay for a few days, (but not We need a
house we can stay-for-afew days.)

After way, in which can be replaced by that or dropped in an informal
style. I didn't like the way (that) she spoke to me.

Do you know a way (that) you can earn money without working?

The same thing happens with why after reason.

The reason (that) you're so bad-tempered is that you're hungry.

For more about place, see 431. For way, see 615. For reason, see 492.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark17>>7    position of prepositions

Prepositions can come either before relative pronouns (more formal) or
at the ends of relative clauses (more informal). Compare:

-    He was respected by the people with whom he worked (formal)

He was respected by the people (that) he worked with. (informal)

-    This is the room in which I was bom. (formal)

This is the room (that) I was born in. (informal)

Who and that are not used after prepositions.

...the people with whom he worked, (not .. .-the-people with who/that he
worked.)

For more about prepositions at the ends of clauses, see 452.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark18>>8    some of whom, none of which etc

In non-identifying clauses, quantifying determiners (e.g. some, any,
none, all, both, several, enough, many and few) can be used with of
whom, of which and of whose. The determiner most often comes before of
which! whom! whose, but can sometimes come after it in a very formal
style.

They picked up five boat-loads of refugees, some of whom had been at sea
for several months, (or ... of whom some...)    >

We've tested three hundred types of boot, none of which is completely
waterproof (or ... of which none...)

They've got eight children all of whom are studying music. (or ... of
whom all are studying...)

She had a teddy-bear, both of whose eyes were missing:

This structure is also possible with other expressions of quantity, with
superlatives, with first, second etc, and with last.

a number of whom three of which    half of which

the majority of whom the youngest of whom

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark19>>9 whatever, whoever etc

Whatever can be used rather like what, as noun + relative pronoun
together.

Take whatever you want (= ... anything that you want.)

Other words that can be used like this are whoever, whichever, where,
wherever, when, whenever and how.

This is for whoever wants it. (= ... any person that wants it.)

I often think about where I met you. (= ... the place where ...)

We've bought a cottage in the country for when we retire. (= ... the
time when...)

Whenever you want to come is fine with me. (= Any day that...)

Look at how he treats me. (= ... the way in which ...)

For details of the use of whoever, whatever and other words ending in
-ever, see 625.

For more about /jow-clauses, see 252.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark20>>10    reduced relative clauses: the girl
dancing

A participle is often used instead of a relative pronoun and full verb.

Who's the girl dancing with your brother?

(= ... that is dancing with your brother?)

Anyone touching that wire will get a shock.

(= ... who touches ...)

Half of the people invited to the party didn't turn up.

{- ... who were invited ...)

I found him sitting at a table covered with papers.

(= ... which was covered with papers.)

Reduced structures are also used with the adjectives available and
possible. Please send me all the tickets available. (= ... that are
available.)

Tuesday's the only date possible.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark21>>11    separating a noun from its relative
pronoun

Relative pronouns usually follow their nouns directly.

The idea which she put forward was interesting, (not The-idearwas
interesting which she put forward.)

I rang up Mrs Spencer, who did our accounts, (not / rang Mrs Spencer up,
who did our accounts.)

However, a descriptive phrase can sometimes separate a noun from its
relative pronoun.

I rang up Mrs Spencer, the Manager's secretary, who did our accounts.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark22>>12    agreement of person

Most relative clauses have third-person reference; I who..., you who...
and we who... are unusual, though they sometimes occur in a very formal
style. You who pass by, tell them of us and say For their tomorrow we
gave our today.

(Allied war memorial at Kohima)

A different kind of first- and second-person reference is common in the
relative clauses of cleft sentences (see 131). However, the verb is
usually third-person, especially in an informal style.

It's me that's responsible for the organisation.

(More formal: It is I who am responsible ...)

You're the one that knows where to go. (not ... the one that know...)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark23>>13    relative + infinitive: a garden in
which to play

When a noun or pronoun is the object of a following infinitive, a
relative pronoun is not normally used.

I can't think of anybody to invite, (not ... anybody whom to invite:)
However, relative pronouns are possible with preposition structures.

We moved to the country so that the children would have a garden in
which to play.

He was miserable unless he had neighbours with whom to quarrel This
structure is rather formal, and it is more common to use infinitive +
preposition without a relative pronoun.

... so that the children would have a garden to play in. (not ... which
to play-in:)

... unless he had neighbours to quarrel with, (not ... whom-to quarrel
with.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark24>>14    relative clauses after indefinite noun
phrases

The distinction between identifying and non-identifying clauses (see
495) is most clear when they modify definite noun phrases like the car,
this house, my father, Mrs Lewis. After indefinite noun phrases like a
car, some nurses or friends, the distinction is less clear, and both
kinds of clause are often possible with slight differences of emphasis.

He's got a new car that goes like a bomb.

(or He's got a new car, which goes like a bomb.)

We became friendly with some nurses that John had met in Paris.

(or We became friendly with some nurses, whom John had met in Paris.) In
general, identifying clauses are used when the information they give is
felt to be centrally important to the overall message. When this is not
so, nonidentifying clauses are preferred.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark25>>15    somebody I know you'll like

It is often possible to combine relative clauses with indirect
statements and similar structures, e.g. I knowlsaidlfeellhopelwish
(that) ..., especially in an informal style. Expressions like I know, I
said etc come after the position of the relative pronoun.

We're going to meet somebody (who/that) I know (that) you'll like.

It's a house (which/that) we feel (that) we might want to buy.

That's the man (who/that) I wish (that) I'd married    *

Note that the conjunction (the second that) is usually dropped in this
structure; it must be dropped if the relative pronoun is a subject.

This is the woman (who/that) Ann said could show us the church.

(not ^{r}FhtHsihe woman (who/that) Ann said that could show us...)

In this structure, people sometimes use whom as a subject pronoun. This
is not generally considered correct.

This is a letter from my father, whom we hope wiU be out of hospital
soon. (More correct:... who we hope will be out...)

Relative clauses can also be combined with (\^clauses in sentences like
the following.

Iam enclosing an application form, which I should be grateful if you
would sign and return.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark26>>16    a car that I didn't know how fast it
could go, etc

We do not usually combine a relative clause with an indirect question
structure. However, this sometimes happens in informal speech.

Vve just been to see an old friend that Vm not sure when I'm going to
see again.

There's a pile of washing-up that I just don't know how I'm going to do.
There is no grammatically correct way of doing this when the relative
pronoun is the subject of the relative clause. However, sentences like
the following (with added pronouns) are also sometimes heard in informal
speech. Some real examples:

I was driving a car that I didn't know how fast it could go.

It's ridiculous to sing songs that you don't know what they mean.

There's a control at the back that I don't understand how it works.

There's still one kid that I must find out whether she's coming to the
party or not

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark27>>17    omission of subject

In a very informal style, a subject relative pronoun is sometimes
dropped after there is.

There's a man at the door wants to talk to you.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark28>>18    double object

Occasionally a relative pronoun acts as the object of two verbs. This
happens especially when a relative clause is followed by before.. .ing,
after...ing or without.. .ing.

We have water that it's best not to drink before boiling, (or ...
boiling it.) I'm sending you a letter that I want you to destroy after
reading, (or ... after reading it)

He was somebody that you could like without admiring, (or ... admiring
him.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark29>>19 older English: who and that which

In older English, who could be used in a similar way to what, as noun +
relative pronoun together, meaning ‘the person who', ‘whoever* or
‘anybody who*. In modem English, this is very unusual.

Who steals my purse steals trash. (Shakespeare, Othello)

(Modem English: WhoeverfAnybody who ...)

That which used to be used in the same way as what. This, too, is very
unusual in modem English.

We have that which we need. (Modem English: We have what we need.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark30>>499    remind

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark31>>1    meaning: remind and remember

These two verbs are not the same. Reminding somebody means ‘making
somebody remember'. Compare:

-    Remind me to pay the milkman. (not Remember me to pay...)

Tm afraid I won't remember to pay the milkman.

-    This sort of weather reminds me of my home, (not This sort of
weather

remembers me-...)

This sort of weather makes me remember my home.

But note the special use of remember in Remember me to your parents and
similar sentences.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark32>>2    structures

After remind, we can use an infinitive structure (for actions) or a
that-clause (for facts).

Please remind me to go to the post office, (not Please remind
mepfgomg-...) I reminded him that we hadn't got any petrol left.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark33>>3    remind... of...

We use remind... of to say that something/somebody makes us remember the
past, or things that have been forgotten.

The smell of hay always reminds me of our old house in the country.

(not ... reminds' me our old house...)

Remind me of your phone number.

We can also use remind ... of to talk about similarities.

She reminds me of her mother (= She is like her mother.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark34>>500    repetition

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark35>>1 avoidance of repetition

In English, unnecessary repetition is usually considered to be a bad
thing. Careful writers generally try not to use the same words and
structures in successive clauses and sentences without a good reason;
when expressions are repeated, it is often for deliberate emphasis or
other stylistic purposes. Casual repetition is more common in informal
language, but even in conversation people often sound monotonous or
clumsy if they do not vary their sentence structure and vocabulary. Some
kinds of repetition are actually ungrammatical in both writing and
speech.    ►

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark36>>2    unnatural/ungrammatical repetition

When we refer again to a person or thing that has already been
mentioned, we normally use a pronoun instead of repeating the original
noun phrase. When the reference is very close to the original mention,
repetition (unless there is a special reason for it) is usually not only
unnatural, but ungrammatical. What's Rachel doing here?She wants to talk
to you. (not ... Rachel wants to talk to you:)

We got that cat because the children wanted it (not We got that cat
because the children wanted that cat.)

Dad's just cut himself shaving, (not Dad's just cut Dad shaving.)

This kind of thing happens with other words besides nouns.

I don't smoke. ~ I do. (not ... I smoke.)

Do you know if the bank's open?~I think so. (not J think the
bank\^s-opten.) She's staying at the Royal Hotel, so we said we'd meet
her there. (not .. .-so we said-\^tve'd meet her at the Royal Hoteh)

However, repetition is necessary and normal when alternatives are
discussed. Would you rather have potatoes or rice? ~ Rice, please.

Shall we dance or go for a walk? \^ Let's go for a walk.

For more details* see 177-182 (ellipsis) and 539 (so).

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark37>>3    duplicated subjects and objects

We do not very often repeat a subject or object with the same verb.

That wall needs painting.

(More normal than That wall, it needs painting.)

I saw my uncle yesterday.

(More normal than My uncle, I saw him yesterday.)

However, this kind of repetition can happen in informal speech, when
people announce a topic and then make a sentence about it (see 513).

That friend of your mother's - he's on the phone.

Those bicycle wheels - I think we ought to put them in the garden shed
And sometimes a pronoun subject is repeated by a noun phrase 'tag* after
the sentence (see 514).

She's a clever girl, your Anne

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark38>>4    related verbs and nouns

We usually avoid putting related verbs and nouns together.

-    We made wonderful plans, oh We planned wonderful things.

(but not We planned wonderful plans.)

-    She wrote an interesting paper. or She did an interesting piece of
writing.

(but not She-wrotean interesting-piece-of writing.)

There are some fixed expressions which are exceptions (e.g. to sing a
song_{t} to live a good life, to die a violent death).

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark39>>5    Wonderful, isn't it? etc

There is a common kind of exchange in which one speaker gives his/her
opinion of something, and the other speaker agrees by saying the same
thing in other words which are at least as emphatic. Repetition is
carefully avoided. Glorious day. ~ Wonderful isn't it? (not ...
Gloriousisn't it?)

Terrible weather.*Dreadful

United didn't play very well, then.*Bloody rubbish.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark40>>6    clumsy style

In writing, repetition is often considered clumsy even when it is not
ungrammatical. Most of the repetitions in the following text would be
avoided by a careful writer, by varying the structure and by careful use
of synonyms (e.g. tried!attempted, summarise ! describe briefly,
forecast!predict).

In this report, I have tried to forecast likely developments over the
next three years. In the first section, I have tried to summarise the
results of the last two years, and I have tried to summarise the present
situation. In the second section, I have tried to forecast the likely
consequences of the present situation, and the consequences of the
present financial policy.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark41>>7    deliberate repetition

Speakers and writers can of course repeat vocabulary and structures
deliberately. This may be done for emphasis.

I'm very, very sorry. I want every room cleaned - every single room.
Repeating somebody else's words may show surprise or disbelief.

I'm getting married. ~ You're getting married? Who to?

Structural repetition can show how ideas are similar or related (by
using the same structure for the same kind of item).

First of all, I want to congratulate you all on the splendid results.
Secondly, I want to give you some interesting news. And finally, I want
to thank you all...

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark42>>8    literary examples

Here are two contrasting examples of repetition used deliberately for
literary purposes. In the first, by John Steinbeck, structures and key
vocabulary (especially nouns and verbs) are repeated and rhythmically
balanced in order to create an impressive (or mock-impressive) effect -
to make the story and characters sound striking and important.

This is the story of Danny and of Danny's friends and of Danny's house.
It is a story of how these three became one thing so that in Tortilla
Flat if you speak of Danny's house you do not mean a structure of wood
flaked with old whitewash, overgrown with an ancient untrimmed rose of
Castile. No, when you speak of Danny's house you are understood to mean
a unit of which the parts are men, from which came sweetness and joy,
philanthropy, and, in the end, a mystic sorrow. For Danny's house was
not unlike the Round Table, and Danny's friends were not unlike the
knights of it. And this is the story of how the group came into being,
of how itflourished and grew to be an organisation beautiful and wise.
This story deals with the adventuring of Danny's friends, with the good
they did, with their thoughts and their endeavors. In the end, this
story tells how the talisman was lost and how the group disintegrated.
(John Steinbeck, Tortilla Flat)    >

In contrast, the following text, by Ernest Hemingway, uses a kind of
style which ‘good' writers would normally avoid, repeating pronouns and
simple structures in an apparently monotonous way. Hemingway's purpose
is to show the simplicity of his hero, an uneducated old fisherman, by
using a style that is supposed to reflect the way he thinks and speaks.

He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was
by himself. He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he
had sung at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in
the smacks or in the turtle boats. He had probably started to talk
aloud, when alone, when the boy had left. But he did not remember.

(Ernest Hemingway, The Old Man and the Sea)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark43>>501    [the] rest

The rest means 'what is left'. It is singular in form, and the is always
used.

We only use three rooms. The rest of the house is empty.

To talk about what is left after something has been used up, eaten,
destroyed etc, we often use other words.

There were remains of the meal all over the floor, (not There were
rests- ...) Supper tonight is leftovers from lunch, (not ... rests...)

If you divide lOOby 12, the remainder is 4.

When the rest refers to a plural noun, it has a plural verb.

There are four chocolates for Penny, four for Joe and the rest are mine.
(not ... the rest is mine.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark44>>502    road and street

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark45>>1    the difference

A street is a road with houses on either side. We use street for roads
in towns or villages, but not for country roads.

Cars can park on both sides of the street here Our village has only got
one street.

Road is used for both town and country.

Cars can park on both sides of our road

The road out of our village goes up a steep hill (not Tke-street-out-of
our village ■ • •)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark46>>2    street names: stress

In street names we normally stress the word Road, but the word before
Street. Marylebone Road ^{$}Oxford Street

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark47>>503    the same

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark48>>1 the same (as)

We normally use the before same.

Give me the same again, please, (not Give-me-same again, please.)

In a comparison, we use the same (. • •) as.

You've got the same idea as me. (not ... my same-idea:)

Her hair's the same colour as her mother's. (not .. Hhesame colour
like...) Note the expression the very same (= exactiy the same).

Our birthdays are on the very same day.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark49>>2 other structures

Before a clause, the same... that or the same ... who can be used.

That's the same man that/who asked me for money yesterday.

As is also possible before a clause, especially with a noun that is the
object of the following verb.

He's wearing the same shirt that/as he had on yesterday.

Asf who! that can be left out when they refer to the object of the
following verb.

He's wearing the same shirt he had on yesterday.

Note also the expression do the same.

Why do you always try to do the same as your brother?

Joe and Carol went on a camping holiday, and we're going to do the same.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark50>>504 say and tell

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark51>>1    meaning and use

Both say and tell are used with direct and indirect speech. (Say is more
common than tell with direct speech.)

Turn right,' I said, (or 'Turn right,' I told him.)

She said that it was my last chance. (or She told me that it was my last
chance.)

Tell is only used to mean ‘instruct' or ‘inform'. So we do not use tell
with greetings, exclamations or questions, for example.

He said, ^{4}Good morning:' (but not He-totehthem, 'Good morning.')

Mary said, What a nice idea' (but not Mary toldrttsr^{£}What a nice
idea.*)

'What's your problem?' I said (but not ^{s}WhtH^{2}s-y&ttr-preblem?' I
told her.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark52>>2    say: objects

Say is most often used without a personal object.

She said that she would be late, (not She said me...)

If we want to put a personal object after say, we use to.

And I say to all the people of this great country...

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark53>>3    tell: objects

After tell, we usually say who is told.

She told me that she would be late, (not She told that...)

Tell is used without a personal object in a few expressions. Common
examples: tell the truth, tell a lie, tell a story!joke.

I don't think she's telling the truth. (not .. .-saying-the-truth:)

Note also the use of tell to mean ‘distinguish', ‘understand', as in
tell the difference, tell the time.

He's seven years old and he still can't tell the time.

Tell is not used before objects like a word, a name, a sentence, a
phrase.

Alice said a naughty word this morning, (not Alice told...)    ►

We do not usually use it after tell to refer to a fact.

What time's the meeting?* I'll tell you tomorrow. (not I'll tell you it
tomorrow.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark54>>4    infinitives

Tell can be used before object + infinitive, in the sense of ‘order' or
‘instruct'. Say cannot be used like this.

I told the children to go away. (not / said the children to go away.)

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark55>>5    indirect questions

Neither tell nor say can introduce indirect questions (see 276).

Bill asked whether I wanted to see a film. (not Bill said
-whether-hwanted to see-a-film. or BtH-told-me whether...)

But say and tell can introduce the answers to questions.

Has she said who's coming?

He only told one person where the money was.

For so after say and tell, see 540.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark56>>505 see

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark57>>1    progressive forms not used

When see means ‘perceive with one's eyes', progressive (‘continuous')
forms are not normally used.

Do you see the woman in blue over there? (not Areyou seeing-...?)

To talk about seeing something at the moment of speaking, can see is
often used, especially in British English (see 125).

I can see an aeroplane. (AmE also / see an airplane.)

(not / am seeing-an-aeropkme.)

But we can say that somebody is seeing things if we mean that he/she is
imagining things that are not there.

Look! A cameU* You're seeing things.

When see means ‘understand' or ‘have heard' (see 243), progressive forms
are not normally used.

We've got a problem. * I see.

I see they're talking about putting up taxes again.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark58>>2    changes

Progressive forms can be used for changes in people's ability to see.

Vm seeing much better since I got those new glasses.

Vm seeing a lot of things in this book that I missed when I read it
before.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark59>>3    'meet', 'arrange' etc

When see means ‘meet', ‘interview', ‘talk to', ‘go out widi* or
‘arrange', ‘supervise', progressive forms are possible.

Vm seeing the dentist tomorrow.

Are you still seeing that Henderson woman?

John's down at the docks. He*s seeing that our stuff gets loaded
properly.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark60>>4 other meanings: 'consider* etc

See can mean 'consider', ‘think', ‘find out', ‘discuss' or ‘decide'.

Can I have a holiday next Monday?*I'll see.

What time shall we go to the gym?* Let me see. How about 5 o'clock?

Can you look out of the window and see if ifs still snowing?

A preposition is necessary before an object in these cases.

We'll see about that tomorrow. (not We'll see that tomorrow.)

You'd better see about that with Jim. (not You'd better see that with
Jim.) See if... can often means ‘try to'.

See if you can get him to stop talking.

For see + object + infinitive I-ing form, see 242.

For the difference between see, look and watch, see 506.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark61>>506 see, look (at) and watch

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark62>>1    see

See is the ordinary verb to say that something ‘comes to our eyes',
whether or not we are paying attention.

Suddenly I saw something strange. (not Suddenly-1 looked at something

vtrctrtgc.j

Did you see the article about the strike in today's paper?

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark63>>2    look (at)

We use look to talk about concentrating, paying attention, trying to see
what is there. You can see something without wanting to, but you can
only look at something deliberately. Compare:

I looked at the photo, but I didn't see anybody I knew.

Do you see that man?* Yes. ~Look again. * Good heavens! It's Moriarty!

He looked at her with his eyes full of love.

When look has an object it is followed by at. When there is no object
there is no preposition. Compare:

Look at me! (not Look me!) Look! (not Look at!)

Note that at is often dropped before a wh-clause.

Look (at) what you've done!

Look who's here!    Look where you're going.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark64>>3    watch

Watch is like look at, but suggests that something is happening or going
to happen. We watch things that change, move or develop.

Watch that man - I want to know everything he does.

I usually watch a football match on Saturday afternoon.

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark65>>4    complete experiences: see

Watch is typically used to talk about experiences that are going on, in
progress. We often prefer see to talk about the whole of a performance,
play, cinema film, match etc. Compare:

He got into a fight yesterday afternoon while he was watching a football
match. (not ... while he was seetng afootball match0 Have you ever seen
Chaplin's ‘The Great Dictator'? (not Have you ever watched Chaplin's
^{4}The Great Dictator'?)    ►

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark66>>5    watch TV

Watch is normally used with TV; watch and see are both used to talk
about TV programmes and films.

You spend too much time watching TV\

We watched/saw a great film on TV last night

<<main-32.xhtml#bookmark67>>6    see if/whether

See can be followed by iff whether, in the sense of ‘find out^{1}. Look
and watch are not normally used in this way.

See if that suit still fits you. (not Look if that-suit"...)

Vm looking to see whether there's any food left. (not Vm looking whether
there's...)

Ring up and see whether she's in.

For infinitives and -ing forms after these verbs, see 242.

For other meanings of see (and progressive uses), see 243, 471.

For other meanings of look, see 157.19. For if and whether, see 621.

There are similar differences between hear and listen (to). See 241.

<<main-33.xhtml>>

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark0>>507 seem

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark1>>1    link verb: used with adjectives

Seem is a link verb (see 328); it is followed by adjectives, not
adverbs.

You seem angry about something, (not You seem angrily\..)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    seem and seem to be

Seem is often followed by to be. We prefer seem to be when we are
talking about objective facts - things that seem definitely to be true.
Seem is used without to be when we are talking about subjective
impressions. (The difference is not always clear-cut, and both are often
possible.) Compare:

-    The bus seems to be full She seems excited

-    The doctors have done the tests, and he definitely seems to be
mentally ill It seems crazy, but I think I'm in love with the postman.
(not It seems to be

crazy...)

-    According to the experts, the north side of the castle seems to be
about 100

years older than the rest.

He seems older than he is. (not He seems to be older than he is - this
would suggest that he might actually be older than he is.)

-    She doesn't seem to be ready yet She seems (to be) very sleepy
today.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    with nouns

Seem to be is normal before noun phrases.

I looked through the binoculars: it seemed to be some sort of large rat.

(not ... -it-seemed- some-sort of-large rat)

I spoke to a man who seemed to be the boss, (not ... who seemed the
boss.) However, to be can be dropped before noun phrases which express
more subjective feelings.

She seems (to be) a nice girl.

The cup seemed almost dolVs size in his hands.

It seems a pity, but I can't see you this weekend, (not It seems-to-be
a-pity-...)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark4>>4    other infinitives

Seem can be followed by the infinitives of other verbs besides be.

Ann seems to need a lot of attention.

Perfect infinitives (see 280) are possible.

The tax people seem to have made a mistake.

To express a negative idea, we most often use a negative form of seem;
but in a more formal style not can go with the following infinitive.
Compare:

He doesn't seem to be at home.

He seems not to be at home, (formal)

Note the structure can't seem to ...

I can't seem to get anything right

(More formal: I seem not to be able to get anything right.)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark5>>5    seem like

We can use like, but not as, after seem.

North Wales seems (like) a good place for a holiday, (not ... seems as
a...)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark6>>6    it seems

It can be a preparatory subject (see 446) for that- and as if-clauses
after seem. It seems that Bill and Alice have had a row.

It seemed as if the night was never going to end.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark7>>7    there seems

There (see 586) can be a preparatory subject for seem to be.

There seems to be some mistake.

For like and as, see 326. Appear is used in similar ways (see 58).

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark8>>508 sensible and sensitive

A sensible person has ‘common sense', and does not make stupid
decisions.

I want to buy that dress. Be sensible, dear. It's much too expensive.

A sensitive person feels things easily or deeply, and may be easily
hurt.

Don't shout at her - she's very sensitive, (not ... very sensible.)

Have you got a sun cream for sensitive skin? (not ... for sensible
skin?) Sensible is a 'false friend' - similar words in some languages
mean ‘sensitive*.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark9>>509 sentence structure (1): basic word order

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark10>>1    subject - verb - object/complement

In an affirmative sentence, the subject normally comes before the verb;
objects or complements come after the verb.

Ann smiled. My father likes dogs. Eric is a doctor.

In a few affirmative structures the verb can come before the subject
(e.g. So can /, In came Mrs Parker). See 302-303. For sentences that
begin with the object (e.g. Those people I can't stand), see 513.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    preparatory it and there

When the subject or object is an infinitive phrase or clause, we often
put it at the end of a sentence, and use it as a preparatory subject or
object (see 446-447).

It's difficult to understand what he wants.

She made it clear that she disagreed There can be a preparatory subject
for an indefinite expression (see 587). There is a big spider in the
bath.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark12>>3    direct and indirect objects

Indirect objects can come before direct objects (without a preposition)
or after direct objects (with a preposition).

She sent the nurse some flowers. She sent some flowers to the nurse.

For details, see 610.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark13>>4    questions: auxiliary before subject

Questions normally have the order auxiliary verb - subject - main verb.

Have you seen Andrew? Where was she going? Did Mary phone? Indirect
questions (see 276) have the subject before the verb.

Do you know where she was going?

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark14>>5    negatives: auxiliary + not

Negative structures have not after an auxiliary verb.

The train did not stop. (not Tke-train stopped not)

For word order in negative questions (e.g. Why didn't she come? i Why
did she not come?), see 368.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark15>>6    adjectives before nouns

When adjectives are together with nouns, they usually come before them.
an interesting book difficult questions

For the order of adjectives, see 15. For exceptions and special cases,
see 13.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark16>>7    adverbs: possible positions

Different adverbs can go in different places in a sentence: at the
beginning, with the verb, or at the end. For details, see 21-25.

Suddenly I had a terrible thought

The children had probably gone home. I was playing badly.

An adverb cannot normally come between a verb and its object.

I like mushrooms very much. (not I like very much mushrooms.)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark17>>8    subordinate clauses (after.... if....
because ..etc)

Adverbial subordinate clauses (beginning for example, after, before,
when, while, if, because) can usually come either before or after the
rest of the sentence (see 510.3).

After I left school I spent a year in China, (or / spent a year in China
after I left school)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark18>>9    prepositions: in what... / what...in

In an informal style, a preposition can be separated from its object in
certain structures. For details, see 452. Compare:

In what hotel did the President stay? (formal)

What hotel did the President stay in? (informal)

For ways of arranging the information in a sentence, see 512.

For special structures in spoken English, see 514.

For word order in exclamations (e.g. How kind you are!), see 195.

For word order with phrasal verbs (e.g. She put out the cat / She put
the cat out), see 599.4.

For structures like The older I get see 139.5.

For structures like cold as/though she was, see 71.

For structures like sol how strange an experience, see 14.

For quite a ... and rather a ..., see 489, 490.

For word order with enough, see 187.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark19>>510 sentence structure (2): conjunctions

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark20>>1 What are conjunctions?

Conjunctions are words that join clauses into sentences.

CLAUSE    CONJUNCTION    CLAUSE

/ went to bed early because I was extremely tired.

SENTENCE

Conjunctions not only join clauses together; they also show how the
meanings of the two clauses are related.

We brought the food and they supplied the drink, (addition)

She was poor but she was honest, (contrast)

We can go swimming, or we could stay here, (alternative)

People disliked her because she was so rude, (cause)

I'll phone you when I arrive, (time)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark21>>2 two kinds

And, but and or are often called ‘co-ordinating conjunctions'. They join
pairs of clauses that are grammatically independent of each other.    »

Other conjunctions, like because, when, that or which, are called
‘subordinating conjunctions'. A subordinating conjunction together with
its following clause acts like a part of the other clause.

ADVERB

I'll phone you I tomorrow.

ADVERB

77/ phone you I when I arrive.

[When I arrive is similar to tomorrow - it acts like an adverb in the
clause 77/ phone you...)

OBJECT He told me I a lie.

OBJECT

He told me I that he loved me.

(that he loved me is similar to a lie- it is the object in the clause He
told me...)

ADJECTIVE

It's an I unanswerable I question.

ADJECTIVE

It's a question I which nobody can answer.

(which nobody can answer is similar to unanswerable - it acts like an
adjective in the clause It's a question...)

Some conjunctions are made up of two or more words.

7 stayed an extra night so that I could see Ann.

Let me know the moment that you arrive.

In grammars, clauses that follow subordinating conjunctions are called
‘subordinate clauses* or ‘dependent clauses'.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark22>>3    position of subordinate clauses

Adverb clauses can usually go either first or last in a sentence
(depending on what is to be emphasised - the most important information
usually comes last).

-    While I was having a shower, I slipped on the floor, (emphasises
what

happened)

I slipped on the floor while I was having a shower, (emphasises when it
happened)

-    If you need help, just let me know.

Just let me know if you need help.

-    Although the bicycle was expensive, she decided to buy it.

She decided to buy the bicycle although it was expensive.

-    Because she was too angry to speak, Ann said nothing.

Ann said nothing, because she was too angry to speak.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark23>>4    punctuation

Commas are often used to separate longer or more complicated clauses.
Shorter pairs of clauses are often connected without commas. Compare:

I came home and the others went dancing.

I decided to come home earlier than I had planned, and the others spent
the evening at the local club.

When a subordinate clause begins a sentence, it is more often separated
by a comma, even if it is short. Compare:

If you are passing, come in and see us.

Come in and see us if you are passing.

For punctuation in relative clauses, see 495.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark24>>5    leaving words out

Words for repeated ideas can often be left out in the second of two
co-ordinate clauses (see 178 for details), but not normally in a
subordinate clause. Compare:

She was depressed, and didn't know what to do. (= and she didn't know
what to do.)

She was depressed, because she didn't know what to do. (not She was
depressed-,-beeause-didn ^{y}t know...)

However, after if, when, while, until, once, unless and (although, a
pronoun subject and the verb be can often be dropped, especially in
common fixed expressions like if necessary.

I'll pay for you if necessary. (= ... if it is necessary.)

If in doubt, wait and see. (= If you are in doubt...)

When in Rome, do as the Romans do. Cook slowly until ready.

Once in bed, I read for twenty minutes and then turned out the light.
Many conjunctions that express time relations [after, before, since,
when, while, whenever, once and until) can often be followed by -ing
forms or past participles instead of subjects and full verbs (see
411.6).

I always feel better after talking to you.

Some things are never forgotten, once learnt.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark25>>6    conjunctions in separate sentences

Normally a conjunction connects two clauses into one sentence. However,
sometimes a conjunction and its clause can stand alone. This happens,
for example, in answers.

When are you going to get up? ~ When Vm ready,

Why did you do that? ~ Because I felt like it

I'm going out, Mum. ~As soon as you*ve brushed your hair.

Writers and speakers can also separate clauses for emphasis.

This government has got to go. Before it does any more damage.
Afterthoughts may also begin with conjunctions.

OK, I did it - But I didn't mean to.

For tenses in subordinate clauses, see 580.

For structures in which that is dropped, see 584.

See also 494-498 (relative pronouns and clauses), 274-278 (indirect
speech), and the individual entries on the various conjunctions.

511 sentence structure (3):

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark26>>problems with conjunctions

In most languages of European origin, clauses are joined together by
conjunctions in similar ways. However, students who speak other
languages may have some problems in using English conjunctions
correctiy.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark27>>1    one conjunction for two clauses

One conjunction is enough to join two clauses - we do not normally use
two.

-    Although she was tired, she went to work.

She was tired but she went to work.

(not Although-she-was-tiredr-bitt-she ■ went-to-work.)

-    Because I liked him, I tried to help him.

I liked him, so I tried to help him.

(not Because I liked him, so I tried to help him.)

-    As you know, I work very hard.

You know that I work very hard.

(not As you know, that I work very hard.)

However, we can use and or or together with a repeated conjunction.

We came back because we ran out of money, and because Ann got ill.

She didn't write when I was ill, or when I got married

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    Relative pronouns are also conjunctions

Relative pronouns (who, which and that - see 494) join clauses like
conjunctions.

There's the girl who works with my sister.

A relative pronoun is like the subject or object of the verb that comes
after it. So we do not need another subject or object.

I've got a friend who works in a pub. (not ... who he works in a pub.)

The man (that) she married was an old ft iend of mine, (not The-man-that
she married him ...)

She always thanks me for the money that I give her. (not ... the money
that!

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark29>>3 that, where and when

That is often used instead of which or who(m) (see 494-495).

There's the girl that works with my sister.

But we do not usually use that instead of when or where.

August 31st is a national holiday, when everybody dances in the streets.

(not ... that everybody dances...)

The house where I live is very small, (not The house that I
live-ts-verysmall) But that... in can mean the same as where.

The house that 1 live in is very small.

That can be used instead of where and when in a few special cases (e.g.
after place, day) ; for details, see 498.6.

I'll always remember the day (that) I met you.

For conjunctions after prepositions, see 453.

For now as a conjunction, see 387. For once, see 394. For the moment and
immediately, see 267.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark30>>512 sentence structure (4): information
structure

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark31>>1    different ways of organising
information

When we talk about a situation, we can usually organise the information
in various ways - for example, by choosing different elements of the
situation as the subject of a clause or sentence.

The storm blew Margaret's roof off.

Margaret's roof was blown off in the storm.

Margaret had her roof blown off in the storm.

The way we choose to organise information in a clause or sentence can
depend on what has been said before, on what the listener already knows,
or on what we want to emphasise. This is a complicated area of English
grammar. Some guidelines are given below.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark32>>2    normal order: important new information
last

Most often, a clause or sentence moves from ‘known' to ‘new': from low
to high information value. So we often choose as the subject a person or
thing that is already being talked about or that has already been
mentioned, or something that the speaker and hearer are both familiar
with, or even some new information that is not the main point of the
message. The important new information generally comes at the end of a
clause or sentence.

How's Joe these days? ~ Oh, fine. He's just got married to a very nice
girl (More natural than ...A very nice girl's just got married to him.)

My father was bitten by a dog last week.

(More natural than A dog bit my father last week.)

Our dog bit the postman this morning.

(More natural than The postman was bitten by our dog this morning.)

I can't find my clothes. ~ Well, your trousers are under my coat.

(More natural than ... My coat's on your trousers.)

To avoid beginning a clause with a completely new element, we can use
the there is structure. For details, see 587.

There's a cat on the roof. (More natural than A cat's on the roof.)

For ‘known' and 'new* information with as, since and because, see 72.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark33>>3    getting the right subject: actives,
passives, etc

In many situations, there is an ‘agent* (the person or thing who does
something) and a ‘patient* (the person or thing that something is done
to). If we want to make the agent the subject, we can usually do this by
choosing an active verb form (see 10).

The storm blew Margaret's roof off.

Somebody's dropped ketchup all over the floor.

If we want to make the patient the subject, we can usually do this by
choosing a passive verb form (see 412).

Margaret's roof was blown off in the storm.

Ketchup has been dropped all over the floor.

If we want to make something else the subject, we can often do this by
using a structure with have + object + past participle (see 238.3).

Margaret had her roof blown off in the storm.

The floor has had ketchup dropped all over it.    ►

Structures with have are often used to ‘personalise* a situation by
making a person the subject.

I've got the house full of children. (Instead of The house is full of
children, or There are children all over the house,)

We can often get the subject we want by choosing the right verb.
Compare:

-    The biscuit factory employs 7,000 people,

7,000 people work far the biscuit factory.

-    He led the children through the silent streets.

The children followed him through the silent streets.

Some verbs can have both agent and patient subjects. For details, see
609. She opened the door The door opened

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark34>>4    end-weight: It worried me that she
hadn't been in touch

Longer and heavier structures usually come last in a clause or sentence.
(These usually have the highest ‘information-value' in any case.)

Children are sometimes discouraged by the length of time it takes to
leam a musical instrument. (More natural than The length of time it
takes to learn a musical instrument sometimes discourages children.)

Because of this, we often use a structure with ‘preparatory if in order
to move a clause or infinitive subject or object to the end of a
sentence. For details, see 446-447.

It worried me that she hadn't been in touch for so long.

(More natural than That she hadn't been in touch for so long worried
me,) Ifs important to tell us everything you know,

(More natural than To tell us everything you know is important.)

He made it clear that he was not in the least interested. (More natural
than He made that he was not in the least interested clear.)

Adverbs do not normally separate the verb from the object in an English
clause (see 21.1). However, a very long and heavy object may come after
a shorter adverb. Compare:

She plays the violin very well (not She plays very well the violin.)

She plays very well almost any instrument that you can think of and
several that you can't.

End-weight can also affect the word order of indirect questions.
Compare: tm not sure what the point is.

Tm not sure what is the point of spending hours and hours discussing
this.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark35>>5    emphatic structures: What I need isNice
man, Joe

There are various ways of giving extra emphasis to one part of a
sentence. One way is to use a ‘cleft sentence* with it or what, this
emphasises one idea by putting everything else into a subordinate
clause. For details, see 130-131.

It was my mother who finally called the police.

What I need is a hot bath and a drink.

If we move to the beginning of a sentence something that does not
normally go there, this gives it extra emphasis. This kind of structure
(‘fronting*) is common in speech, where intonation can make the
information structure clear. For details, see 513.

The other plans we'll look at next week, Nice man, Joe.

For more information about emphasis, see 184.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark36>>513 sentence structure (5): fronting

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark37>>1    People like that I just can't stand

Affirmative sentences most often begin with the grammatical subject.

I just can't stand people like that.

If we begin a sentence with something else ('fronting'), this is often
to make it the topic - the thing we are talking about - even though it
is not the grammatical subject. This can also move the main new
information to the end

- its most natural position (see 512).

This question we have already discussed at some length.

AU the other information which you need I am putting in the post today.

(from a business letter)

Any video in our catalogue we can supply, if available. (Notice in music
shop.)

Fronting is particularly common in speech.

People like that I just can't stand.

(A) fat lot of good that does me. (= ‘That doesn't do me much good^{1},
but putting strong emphasis on me.)

Question-word clauses are often fronted.

What I^{f}m going to do next I just don't know.

How she got the gun through customs we never found out.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    Very good lesson we had

Fronting words in short sentences can also give them extra emphasis.
This happens mostly in speech.

Strange people they are!

Very good lesson we had yesterday. Last for ever these shoes will.

In a few exclamatory expressions, a noun is fronted before that but this
is uncommon in modem English.

Fool that I was!

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    ellipsis: Postman been?

In a very informal style, articles, pronouns and auxiliary verbs are
often left out, bringing a more important word to the front of the
clause. This is called ‘ellipsis': for details, see 179.

Postman been? Seen John?

Sometimes ellipsis is used to front a verb and/or complement, while the
subject is put in a 'tag' (see 514) at the end.

Likes his beer, Stephen does.

Funny, your brother. Nice day, isn't it?

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark40>>4    adverbs etc: Off we go!

Many adverbs and adverbial expressions can go at the beginning of a
clause (see 22). This often happens when we are using the adverbs to
structure a piece of narrative or a description.

Once upon a time there were three little pigs. One day... Then... Soon
after that... After dark, ...

Inside the front door there is... Opposite the living room is... On the
right you can see... At the top of the stairs...    ►

Adverb particles are often fronted when giving instructions to small
children.

Off we go! Down you come!

Inversion (see 302-303) is necessary after some emphatic fronted adverbs
and adverbial expressions.

Under no circumstances can we accept cheques. (not Under no
cireumstances-we-eem-...)

Round the corner came Mrs Porter.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark41>>5 fronting with as or though

Fronted adjectives and adverbs are possible in a structure with as or
though (see 71).

Young as I was, I realised what was happening.

Tired though she was, she went on working.

Fast though she drove, she could not catch them.

Much as I respect his work, I cannot agree with him.

See also entries on basic word order (509), information structure (512),
'spacing out' information in speech (514), tags (514), emphasis (184)
and cleft sentences (130-131).

For the use of passive and other structures to bring objects to the
front, see 512.3, 414.1.

514 sentence structure (6):

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark42>>spoken structures and tags

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark43>>1    This guy who rang up, he's an architect

In informal speech, we often 'space out* the different elements of a
sentence, giving the hearer a little extra time to interpret each part
before going on to the next.

Last Wednesday it was, I was just going to work,...

It's terrible, you know, the unemployment down there.

One way of spacing out information is to separate a subject or object,
announce it at the front of a sentence, and then repeat it with a
pronoun. George Best - now he was a good player.

This guy who rang up, he's an architect Well,...

That couple we met in Berlin, we don't want to send them a card, do we?
One of my brothers, his wife's a singer, he says...

This does not usually happen with pronoun subjects, but me and myself
are occasionally detached and fronted.

Me, I don't care.

Myself I think you're making a big mistake.

Another common way of separating part of a sentence is to introduce it
with You know...

You know Sylvia. Well, she ...

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark44>>2    tags: They work very hard, most of them

We can space out information by putting some of it in a complete
sentence and then adding more details at the end. The extra words at the
end are called a ‘tag'.

They work very hard, most of them.

That's the doorbell, I think I don't mind, to be honest.

It is possible to 'announce' the subject with a pronoun, and put the
full subject in a tag.

He hasn't a chance, Fred, He likes his beer, John,

They're very polite, your children.

In sentences like these, we often drop the pronoun at the beginning.

Hasn't a chance, Fred. Likes his beer, John.

We can also drop an unstressed form of be.

Very polite, your children.

Living in the clouds, you lot. Crazy, that driver.

The tag can repeat the verb by using an auxiliary.

(He) hasn't a chance, Fred hasn't (He) likes his beer, John does.

(She) really got on my nerves, Sylvia did.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark45>>3 emphasising tags: You've gone mad, you
have

Sometimes a tag gives no new information, but simply repeats and
emphasises the subject and verb.

You've gone mad, you have.

I'm getting fed up, I am. He likes his beer, he does.

Pronouns are not usually used alone in tags, except for reflexives.

(I) don't think much of the party, myself.

For more about dropping words ('ellipsis'} at the beginning of a
sentence, see 179.

For other uses of tags and similar structures, see 487-488 (question
tags), 484 (reply questions) and 517 (short answers).

515 sentence structure (7):

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark46>>understanding complicated structures

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark47>>1 clause inside clause: Ann, when she
finally...

Sometimes an adverb clause is put into the middle of another clause,
separating a subject from its verb.

subject + if! when!after! because... + verb

Inrj, when she finally managed to go to steep,(toui)a series of bad
dreams.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

(The governmen tfrifrecen t reports can be trusted,(has) decided not to
raise interest rates.

In these structures, a noun may not be the subject of a verb that comes
just after it.

Mr Andrews, when he saw the policeman, started running as fast as he
could. (It was not the policeman who started running.)

Sentences like these can be hard for learners to understand, especially
if they are long and complicated.

Mr Fisher, after he had completed his discussions with the bank manager,
drew a large sum of money out of the bank and caught the next plane *

to Paris. (A learner might think that it was the bank manager who took
the money and went to Paris.)

One way of deciding what to do if you have difficulty in choosing the
best course of action is to toss a coin. (Does the sentence say that the
best course of action is to toss a coin?)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark48>>2    that picture of the children
standing...

The same thing can happen when the subject of a sentence is followed by
a descriptive phrase or relative clause.

subject + descriptive phrase/clause + verb

That picture of the children standing in front of the Palace talking to
the Prime Minister is wonderful. (The sentence does not say that the
Prime Minister is wonderful.)

The tree that Mary gave to my younger brother is growing fast

The reporter who first made contact with the kidnappers telephoned the
police immediately. (Who telephoned?)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark49>>3    missing relative pronouns: the film she
was talking about

When relative pronouns {who/which/that) are left out (see 494.6), this
can cause difficulty.

It was a question a small child could have answered. {=... that a small
child could have answered.)

The film she was talking about at Celia's party turned out to be very
boring. (= ... the film which she was talking about...)

The manager of Brown's, the chemist's, has confirmed that bottles of
shampoo he took off the shelves after animal rights protesters claimed
to have put bleach into them did contain poisonous chemicals. (=...
bottles of shampoo which he took off...)

The really important point is that because he did not invite the one man
he certainly should have asked his father was angry. (Does the sentence
say that he should he have asked his father?)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark50>>4    missing that The man claimed he was ...

We often leave out the conjunction that after verbs (see 584). This can
make complicated sentences more difficult to follow.

The man who was arrested claimed he was somewhere else at the time of
the robbery. (= ... claimed that he was ...)

She insisted she thought he knew she was on the train. (= She insisted
that she thought that he knew that...)

In short news reports, that is sometimes left out after nouns.

Officials did not accept his claim he was innocent. (= ... that he was
innocent.)

The Minister denied the suggestion he had concealed information from
Parliament. (= ... the suggestion that he ...)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark51>>5    past participles that look like past
tenses: the children asked... told the police

Past participles (e.g. arrested, accused) are often used descriptively
after nouns, rather like reduced relative clauses (see 498.10). When
these look the same as past tenses, they can cause confusion. In the
following examples from news reports, arrested means ‘who was arrested',
accused means ‘who is accused', and asked means 'who were asked'.

A court has heard that a young civil servant arrested after shootings on
Tyneside left one man dead is to be charged with murder

A Karnak separatist accused of leading an attack on a French police
barracks in which four gendarmes died has been arrested.

A number of the children asked for comments on the proposals to expel
some immigrants told the police they disagreed

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark52>>6    reporting expressions: The man who Ann
said will tell us

Complicated structures can be produced when reporting expressions are
included in sentences.

This is the man who Ann said will tell us all about the church.

There are those people that I thought were going to buy our house.

Who did you say (that) you wanted to invite for Christmas?

What do you suppose will happen now?

This can also happen with reported question structures.

He's gone I don't know how far.

We spent I can't remember how much money on our holiday.

Mary gave me you'll never guess what for my birthday.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark53>>7    heavy subject: Getting up very early...
makes...

When the subject of a sentence is a long phrase or clause, the structure
can be difficult to follow.

Getting up very early in the morning makes you feel really superior.

(The first seven words are the subject.)

Going on holiday out of season when everybody else is working can save
you a lot of money. (11-word subject)

What Ann's little sister wanted above everything else in the whole world
was a horse. (12-word subject)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark54>>8    heavy indirect object:

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark55>>I gave all the people who had helped me ...

Similar problems can be caused by a long indirect object.

She gave all the people who had helped her with her research copies of
her book

He brought the village where he had grown up unexpected fame and
prosperity.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark56>>9    more examples

Here are more examples of the above structures, some of them extreme,
taken from news reports and fiction.

A 24-year-old labourer who was arrested in Trafalgar Square when he
allegedly attempted to knife a traffic warden is said to have injured
three policemen.

The Consumers* Association study showed 75% of parents thought junk food
advertising campaigns made it harder for them to insist their children
ate healthy food.    ►

The rebel leader found out that in spite of the precautions of the
soldiers he had bought the guns from the police had planted an informer
among them.

The report will look into claims the design of the courthouse the men
escaped from was at fault.

Statements reassuring the public patients needing intensive care are
getting it are total nonsense.

What they say is surprising isn't.

Pictures of the baby the judge ordered should not be identified by
reporters appeared in a Sunday newspaper.

Police hunting thieves who dumped a ten-month-old baby in an alley after
finding him inside a car they stole have charged two teenage boys.

The head doorman at a nightclub where the ecstacy pill which killed P.
L. was sold has admitted he knew drugs were sold at the club..

But what bothered him more than what the files that were in the drawer
could mean was the feeling that something was certainly missing.

Police called to a house in Hampshire after neighbours reported cries
for help found 18-year-old M. F. stuck in a cat-flap after being locked
out of his home.

Millennium Dome chiefs have refused to discuss reports they ignored
advice attendance figures at the attraction would be lower than hoped.
The Sunday Times says the Millennium Commission warned Dome owners the
New Millennium Experience Company its own estimate was between 4.5m and
5m. NMEC reportedly insisted there would be at least 7m visitors this
year.

(The Millennium Dome was a tourist attraction built in London to
celebrate the year 2000. It lost an enormous amount of money.)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark57>>516    shade and shadow

Shade is protection from the sun.

I'm hot. Let's find some shade to sit in.

The temperature's 30 degrees in the shade.

A shadow is the ‘picture' made by something that blocks out light.

In the evening your shadow is longer than you are.

There's an old story about a man without a shadow.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark58>>517    short answers: Yes, he can etc

Answers are often grammatically incomplete, because they do not need to
repeat words that have just been said. A common ‘short answer' pattern
is subject + auxiliary verb, together with whatever other words are
really necessary.

Can he swim?~~ Yes, he can. (More natural than Yes, he can swim.)

Has it stopped raining?No, it hasn't.

Are you enjoying yourself? ~ I certainly am.

Don't forget to write. \^ I won't.

You didn't phone Debbie last night. ~ No, but I did this morning.

We use do if there is no other auxiliary.

She likes cakes. ~ She really does.

That surprised you, ~~lt certainly did.

Non-auxiliary be and have are used in short answers.

Is she happy? ~ I think she is.

Have you a light? ~ Yes, I have.

Short answers can be followed by tags (see 487-488).

Nice day. --- Yes, it is, isn't it?

Note that stressed, non-contracted affirmative forms are used in short
answers.

Yes, I am. (not ¥e$; Tm.)

For similar structures, see 484 (reply questions), 487-488 (question
tags) and 181 (ellipsis).

For So am / etc, see 541.1.

For So I am etc, see 541.2.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark59>>518 should (1): introduction

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark60>>1    forms

Should is a modal auxiliary verb (see 353-354). It has no -s in the
third person singular.

The postman should be here soon, (not The postman should* ...) Questions
and negatives are made without do.

Should we tell Judy? (not Do-we should...?)

Should is followed by an infinitive without to.

Should I go? (not Should-I-to-go?)

She should be told the truth.

There is a contracted negative shouldn't.

The meeting shouldn't take long.

Should has a weak pronunciation /X3d/, often used when it is not
stressed (see 616).

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark61>>2    obligation, probability

Should can be used to talk about obligation: things that it is good or
important for people to do (see 519.1).

Everybody should wear car seat belts.

It can also be used to say what we think is probable, because it is
logical or normal (see 519.2).

She's away, but she should be back tomorrow.

With these meanings, should is like a weaker form of must.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark62>>3    It is important/surprising that...
should...

Should is used in that-clauses after certain adjectives and nouns,
especially in British English (see 521).

It's important that somebody should talk to the police.

It's surprising that she should say that to you.    ►

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark63>>4    if, in case, etc

Should can be used in (f-clauses (see 261.1 for details), after in case
(see 271.2), after for fear that and lest (see 321) and after so that
and in order that (see 543). If you should see Caroline, tell her Vve
got the tickets.

I'll get a chicken out of the freezer in case Aunt Mary should come.

He turned the radio down so that he shouldn't disturb the old lady.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark64>>5    I should/would; we should/would

Should can be used instead of would after I and we in certain cases.
This happens:

•    in sentences with if (see 258.3)

If I had more time I should/would learn Japanese.

•    in indirect speech (corresponding to shall/will in direct speech -
see 275) I told her that we should/would be ready at 8.00. (‘We
shall/will be

ready ....')

•    and in 'future in the past* sentences (see 221).

I looked at the house where I should/would spend the next three years.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark65>>519 should (2): obligation, deduction etc

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark66>>1    obligation: Everybody should wear seat
belts

We often use should to talk about obligation, duty and similar ideas. It
is less strong than must (see 520).

Everybody should wear car seat belts.

You shouldn't say things like that to Granny.

Applications should be sent before December 30th (More polite than
Applications must be sent...)

In questions, should is used to ask for advice or instructions, like a
less definite form of shall (see 217).

Should I go and see the police, do you think?

What should we do?

For the difference between should and had better, see 230.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark67>>2    probability: She should be back
tomorrow

We can use should to say that we know something is probable (because it
is logical or normal in the circumstances).

She's away, but she should be back tomorrow. (= I have good reasons to
believe that she will be back tomorrow.)

Henry should get here soon - he left home at six.

We're spending the winter in Florida. ~ That should be nice.

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark68>>3    past use: / knew that I should...; /
was supposed to ...

Should is used unchanged in past indirect speech, if should was used in
direct speech.

I thought 7 should write to Jane.' I knew that I should write to Jane.

In other cases, should + infinitive is not normally used to talk about
the past. Instead, we can use for example was I were supposed to ...
(see 572).

It was going to be a long day: I was supposed to clean up all the
stables, and then start on the garden. (not ... Ishould- clean up...)

She was supposed to be in her office, but she wasn't, (not She should be
in her office, but she wasn't.)

<<main-33.xhtml#bookmark69>>4 should have...

Should have + past participle can be used to talk about past events
which did not happen, or which may or may not have happened.

I should have phoned Ed this morning, but I forgot.

Ten o'clock: she should have arrived in the office by now.

You shouldn't have called him a fool - it really upset him.

For should after in case, see 271.2.

For should after so that and in order that, see 543.

For How should...? and Why should..see 482.2.

For special uses of should in other subordinate clauses, see 521*

<<main-34.xhtml>>

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark0>>520 should (3): should, ought and must

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark1>>1    should and ought

Should and ought (see 403) are very similar, and can often replace each
other.

They ought to be more sensible, shouldn't they?

They are both used to talk about obligation and duty, to give advice,
and to say what we think it is right for people to do or have done.
Should is much more frequent than ought.

You should / ought to see ‘Daughter of the Moon^{9} - it's a great film.

You should / ought to have seen his face!

Should and ought are not used in polite requests.

Could you move your head a bit? I can't see. (not ¥ottshotdd / ought to
move your head a bit...)

Should and ought are both also used to talk about logical probability.

I've bought three loaves - that should / ought to be enough.

That should / ought to be Janet coming upstairs now.

Ought, unlike should_{t} is followed by a to-infinitive.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    Must is stronger than should/ought

Must has similar meanings to should and ought, but is stronger or more
definite. It expresses great confidence that something will happen, or
that something is true; should and ought express less confidence.
Compare:

-    The doctor said I must give up smoking.

(an order which is likely to be obeyed)

You really ought to give up smoking.

(a piece of advice which may or may not be followed)

-    Rob must be at home by now. (= Tm sure he is at home.)

Rob should be at home by now. (= I think he is probably at home.)

Should can be used instead of must to make instructions sound more
polite. This form should be filled in in ink.

Applications should be sent by 31 January.    ►

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark3>>3 must not used

Should and ought can be used for predictions - to say what people expect
to happen. Must is not often used in this way.

It should be fine tomorrow, (but not It must be fine tomorrow.)

Next week's exam should be easy. (but not Next week's exam-must be
easy.) Should have and ought to have + past participle can be used to
talk about unfulfilled obligation in the past. Must is not used like
this.

You should have been nicer to Annie. (but not You-must-havc been
nicer-to Annie.)

For details of the use of must, see 358-361.

For the difference between should/ ought and had better, see 230.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark4>>521 should (4): in subordinate clauses

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark5>>1    importance: It's important that...
should...

In formal British English, should can be used in that-clauses after
adjectives and nouns expressing the importance of an action (e.g.
important, necessary, vital, essential, eager_{t} anxious, concerned,
wish).

It's important that somebody should talk to the police.

Is it necessary that my uncle should be informed?

Vm anxious that nobody should be hurt.

It is his wish that the money should be given to charity.

This also happens after some verbs expressing similar ideas, especially
in sentences about the past.

He insisted that the contract should be read aloud.

I recommended that she should reduce her expenditure.

In a less formal style, other structures are preferred.

It's important that she talks to me when she gets here.

Was it necessary to tell my uncle?

In American English, this use of should is unusual; subjunctives may be
used (see 561).

It's important that somebody talk to the police.

Was it necessary that my uncle be informed?

I recommend that she reduce her expenditure.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark6>>2    reactions: It's surprising that she
should...

Should is also used in subordinate clauses after words expressing
personal judgements and reactions, especially to facts which are already
known or have already been mentioned. (This use, too, is more common in
British than American English. It is not particularly formal.)

It's surprising that she should say that to you.

I was shocked that she shouldn't have invited Phyllis.

I'm sorry you should think 1 did it on purpose.

Do you think it's normal that the child should be so tired?

In American English, would is more usual in this kind of sentence.

It was natural that they would want him to go to a good school (BrE...
that they should ...)

Sentences iike these can also be constructed without should.
Subjunctives cannot be used.

It's surprising that she says/said that sort of thing to you. (but not
Ifs surprising that she say...)

I was shocked that she didn't invite Phyllis.

For should in (/-clauses, see 261.1; after in case, see 271.2; after
lest, see 321; after so that and in order that, see 543.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark7>>522 since: tenses

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark8>>1    main clause: I've known her since...

In sentences with since (referring to time), we normally use present
perfect and past perfect tenses in the main clause.

I've known her since 1980. (not I know her since ...)

We haven't seen Jamie since Christmas.

I was sorry when Jacky moved to America; we had been good friends since
university days.

However, present and past tenses are also occasionally found, especially
in sentences about changes.

You're looking much better since your operation.

She doesn't come round to see us so much since her marriage.

Since last Sunday I can't stop thinking about you.

Things weren't going so well since Father's illness.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark9>>2    It's a long time since ...

In British English, present and past tenses are common in the structure
It is! was ... since...

It's a long time since the last meeting.

It was ages since that wonderful holiday.

American English prefers perfect tenses in this structure.

It's been a long time since the last meeting.

It had been ages since that wonderful vacation.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark10>>3    since-dause: since we were at school

Since can be used as a conjunction of time, introducing its own clause.
The tense in the since-clause can be perfect or past, depending on the
meaning. Compare:

-    I've known her since we were at school together.

I've known her since I've lived in this street.

-    You've drunk about ten cups of tea since you arrived.

You've drunk about ten cups of tea since you've been sitting here.

-    We visit my parents every week since we bought the car.

We visit my parents every week since we've had the car.

For more about present perfect tenses, including American usage, see
455-460.

For past perfect tenses, see 423-425.

For the differences between since, Jbr and Jrom, see 208.

For since meaning 'as' or 'because', see 72.

The plural of most nouns is made by just adding -s to the singular. But
there are some special cases.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark11>>523 singular and plural (1): regular plurals

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark12>>1    plural of nouns ending in consonant + y

If the singular ends in consonant + y (for example -by, -dy, -ry, -ty),
the plural is normally made by changing y to i and adding -es.

Singular    Plural

... consonant + y ... consonant + ies

baby    babies

lady    ladies

ferry    ferries

party    parties

If the singular ends in vowel + y (e.g. day, boy, guy, donkey), the
plural is made by adding -s [days, boys, guys, donkeys).

Proper names ending in consonant + y usually have plurals in -ys.

Do you know the Kennedys? (not ... the Kennedies?)

I hate Februarys.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    plural of nouns ending in -sh, -ch, -s,
-x or -z

If the singular ends in -sh, -ch, -s, -x or -z, the plural is made by
adding -es. Singular    Plural

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

... chlshlslxfz church

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

... cheslsheslseslxeslzes churches

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

crash

bus

box

buzz

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

crashes

buses

boxes

buzzes

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Nouns ending in a single -z have plurals in -zzesr. quiz!quizzes,
fez!fezzes.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark14>>3 plural of nouns ending in -o

Some nouns ending in -o have plurals in -es. The most common:

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Singular

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Plural

echoes

heroes

negroes

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Singular

potato

tomato

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Plural

potatoes

tomatoes

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

echo

hero

negro

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Nouns ending in vowel + o have plurals in -s (e.g. radios, zoos). So do
the following, and most new words ending in -o that come into the
language:

Singular

commando

concerto

Eskimo

kilo

logo

Plural

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Singular

photo

piano

solo

soprano

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Plural

photos

pianos

solos

sopranos

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

commandos

concertos

Eskimos

kilos

logos

The following words can have plurals in -s or -es; -es is more common.

Plural

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Singular

buffalo

mosquito

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Singular

tornado

volcano

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

buffalo(e)s

mosquito(e)$

Plural

tornado(e)s

volcano(e)s

524 singular and plural (2):

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark15>>irregular and special plurals

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark16>>1 irregular plurals in -ves

The following nouns ending in -fie) have plurals in -ves.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <table border="1">
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Singular

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Plural

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Singular

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

Plural

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

calf

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

calves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

self

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

selves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

elf

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

elves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

sheaf

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

sheaves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

half

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

halves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

shelf

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

shelves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

knife

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

knives

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

thief

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

thieves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

leaf

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

leaves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

wife

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

wives

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

life

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

lives

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

wolf

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

wolves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

loaf

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

loaves

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td colspan="3">
#+END_HTML

tarf, hoof scarf and wharf can have plurals in either -fs or

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <td>
#+END_HTML

-ves. Hooves,

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </td>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </tr>
#+END_HTML

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </table>
#+END_HTML

scarves and wharves are more common than the plurals in -fs. Other words
ending in -f(e) are regular.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark17>>2 other irregular plurals

| Singular   | Plural     | Singular   | Plural   |
| child      | children   | ox         | oxen     |
| foot       | feet       | penny      | pence    |
| goose      | geese      | person     | people   |
| louse      | lice       | tooth      | teeth    |
| man        | men        | woman      | women    |
| mouse      | mice       |            |          |

The regular plural pennies can be used to talk about separate penny
coins (and one-cent coins in the USA); pence is used to talk about
prices and sums of money. Some British people now use pence as a
singular (e.g. That'll be three pounds and one pence, please).

Persons is sometimes used as a plural of person in official language.
There is also a singular noun people (plural peoples) meaning ‘nation*.
   ►

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark18>>plural same as singular

Some words ending in -s do not change in the plural. Common examples:

Singular    Plural    Singular    Plural

barracks    barracks    headquarters    headquarters

Note that some singular uncountable nouns end in -s. These have no
plurals. Examples are news, billiards, draughts (and some other names of
games ending in -s), measles (and some other illnesses).

Most words ending in -ics (e.g. mathematics, physics, athletics) are
normally singular uncountable and have no plural use.

Too much mathematics is usually taught in schools, (not Too many
mathematics are...)

Some words ending in -ics (e.g. politics, statistics) can also have
plural uses. Politics is a complicated business. (BUT What are your
politics7)

Statistics is useful in language testing. (BUT The unemployment
statistics are disturbing.)

Other nouns which do not change in the plural are craft (meaning
‘vehicle*), aircraft, hovercraft, spacecraft, Chinese, Japanese (and
other nationality nouns ending in -ese)_{f} sheep, deer, fish, and the
names of some other living creatures, especially those that are hunted
or used for food. Fish has a rare plural fishes, but the normal plural
is fish.

Dozen, hundred, thousand, million, stone (=14 pounds) and foot (= 12
inches) have plurals without -s in some kinds of expressions. For
details, see 389.15.

Dice (used in board games) is originally the plural of die, which is not
now often used in this sense; in modem English dice is generally used as
both singular and plural.

Data is originally the plural of datum, which is not now used. In modem
English data can be used either as an uncountable noun (this data is.,.)
or as a plural (these data are...), with no difference of meaning.

Media is originally the plural of medium. The plural expression the
media (meaning ‘radio, TV, newspapers, the internet.. .*) is now quite
often used as an uncountable noun with a singular verb.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark19>>foreign plurals

Some words which come from foreign languages have special plurals.
Examples:

| Singular    | Plural                                    |
| analysis    | analyses (Latin)                          |
| appendix    | appendices (Latin)                        |
| bacterium   | bacteria (Latin)                          |
| basis       | bases (Greek)                             |
| cactus      | cacti (Latin) or cactuses (less common)   |
| corpus      | corpora (Latin)                           |
| crisis      | crises (Greek)                            |

| criterion    | criteria (Greek)               |
| diagnosis    | diagnoses (Greek)              |
| formula      | formulae (Latin) or formulas   |
| fungus       | fungi (Latin) or funguses      |
| hypothesis   | hypotheses (Greek)             |
| kibbutz      | kibbutzim (Hebrew)             |
| nucleus      | nuclei (Latin)                 |
| oasis        | oases (Greek)                  |
| phenomenon   | phenomena (Greek)              |
| radius       | radii (Latin)                  |
| stimulus     | stimuli (Latin)                |
| vertebra     | vertebrae (Latin)              |

Note that some foreign plurals (e.g. agenda, spaghetti) are singular in
English (see 148.5).

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark20>>5    plurals in's

An apostrophe (') is used before the -s in the plurals of letters of the
alphabet, and sometimes in the plurals of dates and abbreviations.

She spelt *necessary' with two c's.

I loved the 1960^{r}s. (the 1960s is more common)

PC's are getting cheaper. (PCs is more common)

It is not correct to use -'5 in other plurals, e.g. jean's.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark21>>6    compound nouns

In noun + adverb combinations, the plural -s is usually added to the
noun.

Singular    Plural

passer-by    passers-by

runner-up    runners-up

The plural of mother-in-law and similar words is generally
mothers-in-law etc, but some people use mother-in-laws etc; the plural
of court martial (= military court or military trial) is either courts
martial (more formal) or court martials (less formal).

In noun + noun combinations, the first noun is usually singular in form
even if the meaning is plural (e.g. shoe shop). There are some
exceptions, (see 531).

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark22>>7    plurals with no singular forms

Cattle is a plural word used to talk collectively about bulls, cows and
calves; it has no singular, and cannot be used for counting individual
animals (one cannot say, for instance, three cattle).

Many cattle are suffering from a disease called BSE. (not Much cattle
h...) Police, staff and crew are generally used in the same way.

The police are looking for a fair-haired man in his twenties. (not
The-poUee is looking ... or A police...)

The staff are on strike, (but A member of staff said..., not A staff...)
However numbers are sometimes used before these three words (e.g. four
staff, six crew).

The expressions the British, the Dutch, the English, the French, the
Irish, the Spanish and the Welsh (see 17.2) are also plural, with no
singular forms. ►

In 1581 the Dutch declared their independence from Spain.

(BUT A Dutchman came into the shop, not A Dutch ...)

Trousers, jeans, pyjamas (AmE pajamas), pants, scales, scissors,
glasses, spectacles (meaning ‘glasses'), binoculars, pliers, and the
names of many similar divided objects are plural, and have no singular
forms. (The equivalent words in some other languages are singular.)

Your jeans are too tight, (not Your jean is...)

Where are my glasses?~ They're on your nose.

To talk about individual items, we can use a pair of {see 430).

Have you got a pair of nail-scissors?

Other common words which are normally plural and uncountable include:
arms, clothes (see 133), congratulations, contents, customs (at a
frontier), funds (= money), goods, groceries, manners (= social
behaviour), the Middle Ages (a period in history), oats (but corn,
wheat, barley and rye are singular uncountable), odds (= chances),
outskirts, premises (= building), regards, remains, savings,
surroundings, thanks, troops.

Congratulations on your new job. (not Congratulation ...)

She lives on the outskirts of Cambridge, (not ... the outskirt...)

For cases where plural nouns are used with singular verbs and pronouns
(and the opposite), see 526-527.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark23>>525 singular and plural (3): pronunciation
of plurals

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark24>>1    nouns ending in /s/, /z/ and other
sibilants

After one of the sibilant sounds /s/, /z/, /X/. /3U /tf/ and /dzl, the
plural ending -es is pronounced /iz/.

buses /*bASiz/    crashes /‘kraefiz/    watches /'WDtJiz/

quizzes /'kwiziz/    garages /*gaera:3iz/ bridges /'bnd3iz/

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    nouns ending in other unvoiced sounds

After any other unvoiced sound (/p/, /f/, /0/, /t/ or /k/), the plural
ending -(e)s is pronounced /s/.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark26>>cups /kAps/    cloths /klnGs/    books
/buks/ beliefs /bi'lirfs/    plates /pleits/

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark27>>3    nouns ending in other voiced sounds

After vowels, and all voiced consonants except /z/, Izl and /dz/, the
plural ending -(e)s is pronounced /z/. days /deiz/    clothes/kldudzl
   legs /legz/

boys /boiz/    ends /endz/    dreams /driimz/

trees /triiz/    hills /hilz/    songs /sdijz/

knives /narvz/

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark28>>4    plurals with irregular pronunciation

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark29>>Singular    Plural

bath /ba:0/    baths /ba:0s/ or /ba:Qz/

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark30>>house /haus/    houses /‘hauziz/

mouth /mau0/    mouths /mauGs/ or /maudz/

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark31>>Plural

paths /pa:0s/ or /pa:6z/ roofs /ruifs/ or /rurvz/ truths /tru:0s/ or
/truidz/ wreaths /ri:0s/ or /ri:5z/ youths /ju:0s/ or /ju:6z/

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Singular

path /pa:0/ roof /ru:f/ truth /tru:0/ wreath /rL0/ youth /ju:0/

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Third person singular forms (e.g. catches, wants, runs) and possessive
forms (e.g. George's, Mark's, /oe's) follow the same pronunciation rules
as regular plurals.

526 singular and plural (4):

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark32>>singular nouns with plural verbs

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark33>>1 groups of people: The team is/are...

In British English, singular words like family, team, government, which
refer to groups of people, can have either singular or plural verbs and
pronouns.

The team is/are going to lose.

Plural forms are common when the group is seen as a collection of people
doing personal things like deciding, hoping or wanting. Singular forms
are more common when the group is seen as an impersonal unit. Compare:

-    My family have decided to move to York. They're going in April The
average family has 3.6 members. It is smaller than 50 years ago.

-    My firm are wonderful They do all they can for me.

My firm was founded in the 18th century.

We prefer who as a relative pronoun with plural forms, and which with
singular forms. Compare:

The committee, who are hoping to announce important changes,...

The committee, which is elected at the annual meeting, ...

When a group noun is used with a singular determiner (e.g. aJan, each,
every, this, that), singular verbs and pronouns are normal. Compare:

The team are full of enthusiasm.

A team which is full of enthusiasm has a better chance of winning.

(More natural than A team who are full...)

Sometimes singular and plural forms are mixed.

The group gave its first concert in June and they are now planning a
tour. Examples of group nouns which can be used with both singular and
plural verbs in British English:

| bank      | committee        | government   | public   |
| the BBC   | England (the     | jury         | school   |
| choir     | football team)   | ministry     | staff    |
| class     | family           | orchestra    | team     |
| club      | firm             | party        | union    |

In American English singular verbs are normal with most of these nouns
in all cases (though family can have a plural verb). Plural pronouns can
be used. The team is in Detroit this weekend They expect to win.    ►

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark34>>2 A number of people have...

Many singular quantifying expressions can be used with plural nouns and
pronouns; plural verbs are normally used in this case.

A number of people have tried to find the treasure, but they have all
failed (More natural than A number of people has tried...)

A group of us are going to take a boat through the French canals.

A couple of my friends plan to open a travel agency. (not A couple-of
-my friends plans...)

A lot of social problems are caused by unemployment, (not A lot of
social problems is caused-.. .)

The majority of criminals are non-violent.

Some of these people are relations and the rest are old friends.

Half of his students don't understand a word he says. (not Half of-his
students doesn't-.. .)

For more about a lot and lots, see 333. For the rest, see 501. For (a)
few, see 329.

For singular and plural nouns with fractions, see 532.9.

527 singular and plural (5):

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark35>>plural expressions with singular verbs

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    amounts and quantities: that five
pounds

When we talk about amounts and quantities we usually use singular
determiners, verbs and pronouns, even if the noun is plural.

Where is that five pounds I lent you? (not Where are-those-five
pounds...?) Twenty miles is a long way to walk.

We've only got five litres of petrol left. ~ That isn't enough.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    calculations

Singular verbs are often possible after plural number subjects in spoken
calculations.

Two and two is/are four.

Ten times five is fifty, (or Ten fives are fifty.)

For more about spoken calculations, see 389.22-23.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark38>>3    more than one

More than one is generally used with a singular noun and verb.

More than one person is going to have to find a new job.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark39>>4    one of...

Expressions beginning one o/normally have a plural noun and a singular
verb. One of my friends is getting married, (not One of my friends
are-...)

For singular and plural verbs in relative clauses after one of..., see
529.1.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark40>>5    and

Some expressions joined by and have singular determiners, verbs and
pronouns. This happens when the two nouns are used together so often
that we think of them as a single idea.

This gin and tonic isn't very strong, is it?

Your toast and marmalade is on the table.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark41>>6    countries and organisations

Plural names of countries usually have singular verbs and pronouns.

The United States is anxious to improve its image in Latin America.

Plural names of organisations may also have singular verbs and pronouns.
Consolidated Fruitgrowers has just taken over Universal Foodstores.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark42>>528    singular and plural (6): singular
they

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark43>>1    Somebody left their umbrella

They! them! their is often used to refer to a singular indefinite
person. This is common after a person, anybody! one, somebody! one,
nobody! one, whoever, each, every, either, neither and no. They has a
plural verb in this case.

If a person doesn't want to go on living they are often very difficult
to help. If anybody calls, take their name and ask them to call again
later. Somebody left their umbrella in the office. Would they please
collect it? Nobody was late, were they? Whoever comes, tell them Vm not
in.

Tell each person to help themselves to what they want Every individual
thinks they're different from everybody else.

This singular use of they! them! their is convenient when the person
referred to could be either male or female (as in the examples above).
He or she, him or her and his or her are clumsy, especially when
repeated, and many people dislike the traditional use of he! him! his in
this situation (see 222).

However, theyItheml their can also be used when the person's sex is
known. Two examples from interviews:

I swear more when Tm talking to a boy, because I'm not afraid of
shocking them.

No girl should have to wear school uniform, because it makes them look
like a sack of potatoes.

They! them! their is sometimes used for a definite person who is not
identified. I had a friend in Paris, and they had to go to hospital for
a month

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark44>>2    correctness

This use of they! them! their has existed for centuries, and is
perfectly correct. It is most common in an informal style, but can also
be found in formal written English. Here is an example from a British
passport application form:

Dual nationality: if the child possesses the nationality or citizenship
of another country they may lose this when they get a British Passport.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark45>>529    singular and plural (7): mixed
structures

In some complex structures, the same verb seems to belong with two
different expressions, one singular and the other plural    ►

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark46>>1    one of the few women who have climbed
Everest

After expressions like one of the..., singular and plural verbs are both
used in relative clauses beginning who, which or that.

She's one of the few women who have/has climbed Everest This is one of
those books that are/is read by everybody.

Strictly speaking, a plural verb is correct (to agree with the few women
who or those books that). However, singular verbs are also very common
in these structures. More examples:

One of the things that really make/makes me angry is people who don't
answer letters.

We've got one of those Japanese cars that never break/breaks down.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark47>>2    A serious problem is wasps

In English a verb normally agrees with the subject of a sentence, not
with a following complement.

S    VC

The biggest timewaster is meetings.

(not The biggest timewaster-are-meetings-.)

S    VC

A serious problem in our garden is wasps.

(not A serious problem... are wasps.)

However, if the subject is a long way from the verb, people sometimes
make the verb agree with a complement.

S

What we need is/are a few bright young engineers.

For singular and plural verbs after interrogative what and who, see
532.3.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark48>>3 singular subject, plural continuation,
plural verb

When a singular subject is modified by a following plural expression,
people sometimes use a plural verb. This is not usually considered
correct.

Nobody except -his best friends like kirn:

(More correct: Nobody... likes him.)

A good knowledge of three languages are necessary for this-job:

(More correct: A good knowledge... is...)

For singular or plural after kind(s), sort(s), type(s) etc, see 551.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark49>>530 singular and plural (8): distributive
plural

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark50>>1    people doing the same thing

To talk about several people each doing the same thing, English usually
prefers a plural noun for the repeated idea.

Tell the kids to bring raincoats to school tomorrow.

(More natural than Tell the kids to bring a raincoat...)

Plural forms are almost always used in this case if there are
possessives.

Tell the children to blow their noses. (not ... to blow their nose:)

Six people lost their lives in the accident.

Uncountable nouns cannot of course be used in the plural.

They were all anxious to increase their knowledge. (not .. .-their
knowledges.)

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark51>>2    repeated events

In descriptions of repeated single events, singular and plural nouns are
both possible. When no details are given, plural nouns are more natural.

I often get headaches. (not 1-ofien-get-a-headaeke.)

She sometimes goes for rides over the hills.

When details of the time or situation are given, nouns are often
singular.

I often get a headache when Vve been working on the computer.

She often goes for a ride over the hills before supper:

Singular nouns may also be used to avoid misunderstanding.

I sometimes throw a stone into the river and wish for good luck.

(not I-sometimes throw stones-... - only one stone is thrown each time.)
To refer to the time of repeated events, both singular and plural
expressions are often possible with little difference of meaning.

We usually go and see my mother on Saturday(s).

He's not at his best in the moming(s).

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark52>>3    generalisations and rules

In generalisations and rules, singular and plural nouns are both
possible.

We use a past participle in a perfect verb form, (or We use past
participles in perfect verb forms.)

All documents must be accompanied by a translation of the original (or
All documents must be accompanied by translations of the originals.)
Mixtures of singular and plural are possible.

Subjects agree with their verb.    ►

Children may resemble both their father and their mother in different
ways. This often happens with fixed singular expressions like at the
beginning. Discourse markers usually come at the beginning of sentences.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark53>>531    singular and plural (9): noun + noun

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark54>>1    first noun singular: shoe shop

In noun + noun structures (see 385-386), the first noun is normally
singular in form even if it has a plural meaning. a shoe shop (= a shop
that sells shoes)

a toothbrush (= a brush for teeth) trouser pockets (= pockets in
trousers) a ticket office (= an office that sells tickets)

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    exceptions

Some nouns are plural in this structure. These include nouns which have
no singular form (like clothes), nouns which are not used in the
singular with the same meaning (like customs), and some nouns which are
more often used in the plural than in the singular (like savings). In
some cases, e.g. antique(s), drug(s), usage is divided, and both
singular and plural forms are found. In general, plurals are becoming
more common in this structure. Examples:

a clothes shop    a drinks cabinet

a glasses case    a goods train (British English)

a customs officer    a sports car

arms control    a greeting(s) card

a savings account    an antique(s) dealer!shop

the accounts department    the drug(s) problem

the sales department    the arrival(s) hall (at an airport)

the outpatients department (of a hospital)

Note also that singular nouns ending in -ics can be used before other
nouns. athletics training an economics degree We use the plurals men and
women to modify plural nouns when they have a ‘subject* meaning; man and
woman are used to express an ‘object' meaning. Compare:

-    men drivers (= men who drive) women pilots (= women who fly planes)

-    man-eaters (= lions or tigers that eat people) woman-haters (=
people who hate women)

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark56>>532    singular and plural (10): other
points

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark57>>1 uncountable nouns: hair_{f} baggage etc

Certain English singular uncountable nouns correspond to plural nouns in
some other languages.

Your hair is very pretty. (not Your hairs are...)

My baggage has been lost, (not My baggages have...)

For a list of words of this kind, see 148.3.

For plural uncountables, see 149.5.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark58>>2    co-ordinated subjects: A and B, A or B,
A as well as B, etc

When two singular subjects are joined by and, the verb is normally
plural.

Alice and Bob are going to be late.

But note that some phrases with and are treated like single ideas, and
used with singular verbs (see 527.5).

Your toast and marmalade is on the table.

When two subjects are joined by as well as, together with or a similar
expression, the verb is usually singular if the first subject is
singular.

The Prime Minister, as well as several Cabinet Ministers, believes in a
tough financial policy.

The Managing Director, together with his heads of department, is
preparing a new budget.

When two subjects are joined by or the verb is usually singular if the
second subject is singular, and plural if it is plural. Compare:

There's no room - either two chairs or a table has got to be moved.

There's no room - either a table or two chairs have got to be moved.

When two singular subjects are joined by neither... nor, the verb is
normally singular in a formal style, but can be plural in an informal
style.

Neither she nor her husband has arrived, (formal)

Neither she nor her husband have arrived (informal)

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark59>>3    who and what

When who and what are used to ask for the subject of a clause, they most
often have singular verbs, even if the question expects a plural answer.

Who is working tomorrow? ~ Phil, Lucy and Shareena (are working
tomorrow). (More natural than Who are working tomorrow7)

Who was at the party? (More natural than Who were at the party7)

What lives in those little holes?~ Rabbits (do), (not What live...)

When who and what are used to ask for the complement of a clause, they
can have plural verbs.

Who are your closest friends? ~ (My closest friends are) Naomi and
Bridget. What are your politics? ~ (My politics are) extreme left-wing.

Relative what-clauses are normally the subject of a singular verb.

What she needs is friends. (More natural than What she needs are
friends.) However, plural verbs are often used before longer plural
complements, especially if what is a long way from the verb (see 529).

What we need most of all are some really new ideas.

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark60>>4    here's, there's and where's

In an informal style, here's, there's and where's are common with plural
nouns. Here's your keys.    There's some children at the door.

Where's those books I lent you?

<<main-34.xhtml#bookmark61>>5    none, neither and either

When none, neither and either are followed by of+ plural noun/pronoun,
they are normally used with singular verbs. Plural verbs are possible in
an informal style.    ».

slang 533

None of the cures really works.

None of the cures really work (informal)

Neither of my brothers has/have been outside England Has/Have either of
them been seen recently?

<<main-35.xhtml>>

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark0>>6    another, a/an + adjective

Plural expressions of quantity can be used with another (see 54) and
with a/an + adjective.

I want to stay for another three weeks.

We'll need an extra ten pounds.

He's been waiting for a good two hours.

She spent a happy ten minutes looking through the photos.

I've had a very busy three days.

Note also the expression a good many!few + plural (informal).

Vve lain awake a good many nights worrying about you.

7 bet that house could tell a good few stories.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark1>>7    kind, sort and type

In an informal style, we sometimes mix singular and plural forms when we
use demonstratives with kind, sort or type. For details, see 551.

7 don't like those kind of boots.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark2>>8    every (frequency)

Every (which is normally used with singular nouns) can be used before
plural expressions in measurements of frequency.

7 go to Ireland every six weeks.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark3>>9    fractions

Fractions between 1 and 2 are normally used with plural nouns (see
389.2). It weighs one and a half tons, (not ... one and a half ton.)

The house has about 1.75 hectares of land.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark4>>533 slang

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark5>>1    What is slang?

‘Slang* is a very informal kind of vocabulary, used mosdy in speech by
people who know each other well. Examples:

Can you lend me some cash? [money) My shoelace has bust, (broken) He's a
real prat, (fool)    Those boots are real cool (fashionable)

Let's chill out. (relax)    How are the kids? (children)

Slang expressions are not usually written, and not used in formal kinds
of communication.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark6>>2    strong feelings

Many English slang expressions relate to things that people feel
strongly about (e.g. sex, family and emotional relationships, drink,
drugs, conflict between social groups, work, physical and mental
illness, death).

She's got really nice tits, (breasts)

I spent the weekend at my gran's. [grandmother's)

God, we got smashed last night (drunk)

Prods out! (Protestants)

Can you get that sitrep to the MD by five? (situation report; Managing
Director)

Vve got some sort of bug. (illness)

He's lost his marbles, (gone mad)

When I kick the bucket, I want you all to have a big party. (die)

Slang can be used in order to be offensive.

Shut your gob! (mouth)

For more about ‘taboo* words for subjects that some people find
shocking, see 575.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark7>>3 group membership; using slang

Many slang expressions (e.g. cash, kids) are widely used. However, some
slang expressions are only used by members of particular social and
professional groups, and nearly all slang is used between people who
know each other well or share the same social background. So it is
usually a mistake for ‘outsiders* (including foreigners) to try
deliberately to use slang. This can give the impression that they are
claiming membership of a group that they do not belong to. There is also
the danger that the slang may be out of date - some kinds of slang go
out of fashion quickly, and when it gets into books it may already be
dead. It is best for learners to avoid slang unless they are really sure
of its use. If they start becoming accepted as part of an
English-speaking community, they will learn to use the community's slang
naturally and correctly along with the rest of their language.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark8>>534 small and little

Small simply refers to size. It is the opposite of big or large (see
106).

Could I have a small brandy, please?

You're too small to be a policeman.

The adjective little usually expresses some kind of emotion.

Poor little thing - come here and let me look after you.

What's he like? ~ Oh, he's a funny little man.

What's that nasty little boy doing in our garden?

They've bought a pretty little house in the country.

In a few fixed expressions, little is used in the same way as small or
short, little finger    a little while

the little hand of a clock a little way In British English little is
unusual in ‘predicative* position (after a verb), and comparative and
superlative forms are not normally used.

The puppy was so small and sweet.

(More natural than The puppy was so little...)

He's the smallest baby I've ever seen.

(More natural than ...the littlest baby...)

For little used as a determiner meaning ‘not much' (e.g. There's little
hope), see 329.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark9>>535    smell

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark10>>1    British and American forms

In British English, regular and irregular past tenses and participles
are both common: smelled and smelt. American forms are usually regular.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    link verb

Smell can be used as a 'link verb' (see 328), followed by an adjective
or noun, to say how something smells. Progressive forms are not used.

Those roses smell beautiful (not ... smell beautifully.)

The soup smells funny. What's in it? (not ...-tssmelUng-furmy-...)

Before a noun, smell of and smell like are used.

The railway carriage smelt of beer and old socks.

His aftershave smelt like an explosion in a flower shop.

Smell is sometimes used to mean ‘smell bad'.

That dog smells.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark12>>3    transitive verb: 'perceive'

Smell can be used with an object to say what we perceive with our noses.
Progressive forms are not used. We often use can smell (see 125).

As we walked into the house, we smelt something burning.

I can smell supper.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark13>>4    transitive verb: 'investigate'

Another transitive use is to say that we are using our noses to find out
something. Progressive forms can be used.

What are you doing? \^ I'm smelling the meat to see if it's still OK

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark14>>536    so: adverb meaning 'like this/that'

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark15>>1    after seem, appear etc

So can be used in a formal style in a few cases to mean 'like
this/that', ‘in this/that way'. This happens, for example, after seem,
appear, remain, more and less.

Will the business make a loss this year? ~ It appears so.

The weather is stormy, and will remain so over the weekend

She was always nervous, and after her accident she became even more so.

I read the front page very carefully, and the rest of the paper less so.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark16>>2    not used in other cases

In other cases, so is not normally used adverbially to mean 'like
this/that', 'in this/that way*.

Look - hold it up in the air like this, (not ... hold it up in the air
so.) When he laughs like that I want to scream. (not When he
Iattghs-so-...)

I don't think we should do it in that way. (not do it so.)

He says he is ill and he looks it. (not ... he looks so.)

For so with say and tell, see 540.    For so am I etc, see 541.

For so with hope, believe etc. see 539. For do so, see 162.

so (degree adverb): so tired, so fast 538

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark17>>537    so (conjunction) and then

So and then can both be used in replies, to mean 'since that is so',
^{f}it follows from what you have said'.

It's more expensive to travel on Friday. ~ Then/So I'll leave on
Thursday.

I'll be needing the car. ~ ThenJSo I suppose I'll have to take a taxi.

So (but not then) can also be used when the same speaker connects two
ideas, to mean ‘it follows from what I have said'.

It's more expensive to travel on Friday, so I'll leave on Thursday.

(not ... Then I'll leave on Thursday.)

For so used like and, see 157.14.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark18>>538    so (degree adverb): so tired, so fast

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark19>>1    meaning

So means 'that much' or 'to that extent'. It is used when we are talking
about a high degree of some quality - in situations where very is also a
suitable word. Vm sorry you're so tired (= I know you're very tired, and
I'm sorry.)

It was so cold that we couldn't go out. (= It was very cold weather, and
because of that we couldn't go out.)

I wish she didn't drive so fast

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark20>>2    so and very

Very (see 611) is used when we are giving new information. So is mainly
used to refer to information which has already been given, which is
already known, or which is obvious. Compare:

-    You're very late. (giving new information)

I'm sorry I'm so late. (referring to information which is already known)

-    It was very warm in Scotland. (giving new information)

I didn't think it would be so warm. (referring to information which is
already known)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark21>>3    emphatic use

In an informal style, so can also be used like very to give new
information, when the speaker wishes to emphasise what is said. This
structure is rather like an exclamation (see 195).

He's so bad-tempered! (= How bad-tempered he is!)

You're so right!

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark22>>4    so... that

We use so, not very, before tfuzf-clauses.

It was so cold that we stopped playing, (not It was very cold that we
stopped playing.)

He spoke so fast that nobody could understand (not He spoke very fast
that...)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark23>>5    before adjectives and adverbs

We can use so before an adjective alone (without a noun) or an adverb.

The milk was so good that we couldn't stop drinking it Why are you
driving so fast?

So is not used with adjective + noun.

I didn't expect such terrible weather. (not ... so terrible-weather;)

I enjoyed my stay in your country, which is so beautiful (not I enjoyed
my stay in your so beautiful country.)

For such, see 569.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark24>>6    so much, etc

We can use so much and so many (see 542), so few and so little with or
without nouns.

I've bought so many new books I don't know when I'll read them.

There were so few interesting people there that we decided to go home.

I've read so much and learnt so little.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark25>>7    so and so much

We use so, not so much before adjectives without nouns (see paragraph 5
above). Compare:

-    She had so much heavy luggage that she couldn't carry it

Her luggage was so heavy that she couldn't carry it (not Her
luggageivas-so much •heavy...)

-    I've never seen so much beautiful jewellery.

The jewellery is so beautiful! (not ... so much-bemttifuU)

But we use so much, not so, before comparatives.

I'm glad you're feeling so much better. (not ... so better)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark26>>8    so ... as to ...

There is a structure with so followed by adjective + as to + infinitive.
This is formal and not very common.

Would you be so kind as to tell me the time? (= ... kind enough to ...)
(not Would you-be-so kind and... or Would you be so kind to ...)

9    SO a a a a a a a

There is another rather formal structure with so + adjective + a/an +
noun (see 14).

I had never before met so gentle a person. (=... such a gentle person.)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark27>>539 so and not with hope, believe etc

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark28>>1 instead of t/iat-clauses.

We often use so sifter believe, hope, expect imagine, suppose, guess,
reckon, think, be afraid, instead of repeating words in a that-clause.

Is Alex here?~ I think so. (not .. ./• think that Alex is here.)

Do you think we'll be in time? ~ I hope so. (not hhope:)

Did you lose? \^ I'm afraid so.

We do not use so before a that- clause.

I hope that we'll have good weather, (not I hope so, that we'll have
good

M/Cutrtrr.j

Note the special use of I thought so to mean ‘my suspicions were
correct'.

Empty your pockets. Ah, I thought so! You've been stealing biscuits
again. So is not used after know (see 313).

You're late. ~7 know. or I know that. (not I know so.)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark29>>2    negative structures

We can make these expressions negative In two ways, affirmative verb +
not

Did you win? ~ I'm afraid not.

We won't be in time for the train. \^No, I suppose not.

negative verb + so

You won't be here tomorrow?~7 don't suppose so.

Will it rain?~7 don't expect so.

Hope and be afraid are always used in the first structure.

7 hope not (not 7 don't hope so.)

Think is more common in the second structure.

I don't think so. (More common than 7 think not.)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark30>>3    so at the beginning of a clause

We can use so at the beginning of a clause with say, hear, understand,
tell, believe and a number of other verbs. This structure is used to say
how the speaker learnt something.

It's going to be a cold winter, or so the newspaper says.

Mary's getting married. ~ Yes, so I heard The Professor's ill ~ So I
understand

For so after tell and say, see 540.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark31>>540 so with say and tell

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark32>>1 instead of t/iat-clauses

So can be used after say and tell instead of repeating information in a
that- clause.

She's going to be the next president. Everybody says so. (= ...
Everybody says that she's going to be the next president.)

You've got to clean the car. Who says so?

Taxes are going up. Bob told me so.

Note that so is used in this way mostly when we are talking about the
authority for statements, about reasons why we should believe them. When
we simply want to identify the speaker, we prefer that. Compare:

Jane's crazy. ~ Who says so?\^Dr Bannister.

Jane's crazy. ~ Who said that? ~ 7 did.

For 50 at die beginning of a clause (e.g. so the newspaper says), see
539.3.    ►

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark33>>2    / told you so

I told you so usually means *1 warned you, but you wouldn't listen to
me'. Mummy, I've broken my train, ~ I told you so. You shouldn't have
tried to ride on it.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark34>>3    other verbs

So cannot be used after all verbs of saying. We cannot say, for example,
She promised me so.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark35>>541    so have I, so am I etc

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    so + auxiliary + subject

We can use so to mean 'also*, before auxiliary verb + subject The
structure is used to answer or add to what came before. Note the word
order.

Louise can dance beautifully, and so can her sister.

I've lost their address. ~ So have I.

The same structure is possible with non-auxiliary be and have.

I was tired, and so were the others.

I have a headache. ~ So have I.

After a clause with no auxiliary verb, we use do!does!did.

He just wants the best for his country. ~ So did Hitler.

We do not normally use a more complete verb phrase in this structure. We
can say, for example, So can her sister, but not So can hersister-danee.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    so + subject + auxiliary

So can also be followed by subject + auxiliary verb (note the word
order) to express surprised agreement.

It's raining. ~ Why, so it is!

You've just put the teapot in the fridge. ~ So I have!

For neither/nor am I etc, see 374.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark38>>542    so much and so many

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark39>>1 the difference

The difference between so much and so many is the same as between much
and many (see 357). So much is used with singular (uncountable) nouns;
so many is used with plurals.

/ had never seen so much food in my life.

She had so many children that she didn't know what to do. (not .. . so
much ehUdren-...

We use so, not so much, to modify adjectives and adverbs (see 538.5,6).

You're so beautiful (not You're so much -beautiful.)

But so much is used before comparatives (see 140).

She's so much more beautiful now.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark40>>2    so much/many without a noun

We can drop a noun after so much/many, if the meaning is clear.

I can't eat all that meat - there's so much!

I was expecting a few phone calls, but not so many,

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark41>>3    so much as an adverb

So much can be used as an adverb.

I wish you didn't smoke so much.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark42>>4    special structures with so much

We can use not so much... as or not so much... but to make corrections
and clarifications.

It wasn't so much his appearance I liked as his personality.

Ifs not so much that I don't want to go, but I just haven't got time.

In negative and i/-clauses, so much as can be used to mean ‘even*.

He didn't so much as say thank you_{t} after all we'd done for him.

If he so much as looks at another woman, I'll kill him.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark43>>543 so that and in order that

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark44>>1    purpose

These structures are used to talk about purpose. So that is more common
than in order that, especially in an informal style. They are often
followed by auxiliary verbs such as can or will; may is more formal.

She's staying here for six months so that she can perfect her English.

I'm putting it in the oven now so that it'll be ready by seven o'clock
We send monthly reports in order that they may have full information.

In an informal style, that can be dropped after so (see 584).

I've come early so I can talk to you,

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark45>>2    present tenses for future

Present tenses are sometimes used for the future.

M send the letter express so that she gets / she'll get it before
Tuesday.

I'm going to make an early start so that I don'tlwon't get stuck in the
traffic. We must write to him, in order that he does/will not feel that
we are hiding things.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark46>>3    past structures

In sentences about the past, would, could or should are generally used
with verbs after so that / in order that. Might is possible in a very
formal style. Mary talked to the shy girl so that she wouldn't feel left
out.

I took my golf clubs so that I could play at the weekend

They met on a Saturday in order that everybody should be free to attend

He built a chain of castles so that he might control the whole country.

For the infinitive structures in order to and so as to, see 289.

For so ... that expressing result, see 538.4.

For lest meaning ‘so that... not', see 321.

so-and-so; so-so 544

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark47>>544    so-and-so; so-so

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark48>>1    so-and-so

This informal expression is used when one cannot remember a name.

What's happened to old so-and-so? (= ... what's his name?)

It can also replace a swearword or an insult.

She's an old so-and-so.

2    50-50

This informal expression means ‘neither good nor bad.'

How are you feeling?~ So-so. (not ... So-and-so.)

Was the concert any good? ~ So-so.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark49>>545    'social' language

Every language has fixed expressions which are used on particular social
occasions - for example when people meet, leave each other, go on a
journey, sit down to meals and so on. Here are some of the most
important English expressions of this kind.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark50>>1    introductions

Common ways of introducing strangers to each other are:

John, do you know Helen? Helen, this is my friend John.

Sally, I don't think you've met Elaine.

I don't think you two know each other, do you?

Cart/May I introduce John Willis? (more formal)

When people are introduced, they usually say How do you do? (formal),
Hello_{t} or Hi (informal). Americans often say How are you? Note that
How do you do? is not a question, and the normal reply is How do you do?
(It does not mean the same, in British English, as How are you?) Another
possible response is Glad! Pleased to meet you.

People who are introduced often shake hands.

For the use of first names, surnames and titles, see 363.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark51>>2    greetings

When meeting people (formal):

(Good) morning!afternoon!evening.

When meeting people (informal):

Hello. Hi. (very informal)

When leaving people:

Good morning! afternoon! evening.(yery formal, unusual)

Goodnight. Goodbye.

Bye. (informal) Bye-bye. (often used to and by children)

Cheers. (informal - British only) Take care, (informal)

See you. (informal) See you later / tomorrow / next week etc. (informal)
It was nice to meet / meeting you.

Note that Good day is very unusual, and Goodnight is used only when
leaving people, not when meeting them.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark52>>3    asking about health etc

When we meet people we know, we often ask politely about their health or
their general situation.

How are you?    How's it going? (informal)

How are things? / How's things? (informal) How (are) you doing? Formal
answers:

Very well, thank you. And you? Fine, thank you.

Informal answers:

FinefGreat, thanks. All right    (It) could be worse.

OK.    Not too bad Mustn't grumble.

So-so. (not So and so.)

British people do not usually ask How are you? when they are introduced
to people. And neither British nor American people begin letters to
strangers by asking about health (see 146).

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark53>>4    special greetings

Greetings for special occasions are:

Happy birthday! (or Many happy returns!)

Happy New Year / Easter!

HappylMerry Christmas! Happy anniversary!

Congratulations on your exam results / new job etc (not Congratulation
ort-...)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark54>>5    small talk

British people often begin polite conversations by talking about the
weather. Nice day, isn't it?*Lovely.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark55>>6    getting people's attention

Excuse me! is commonly used to attract somebody's attention, or to call
a waiter in a restaurant. We do not normally say Excuse me, sir! madam
(see 363.2).

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark56>>7    apologies

British people say Excuse me before interrupting or disturbing somebody,
and Sorry after doing so. Compare:

Excuse me. Could I get past? Oh, sorry, did I step on your foot?

Excuse me, could you tell me the way to the station?

Americans also use Excuse me to apologise after disturbing somebody.

I beg your pardon is a more formal way of saying ‘Sorry'.

I beg your pardon. I didn't realise this was your seat

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark57>>8    asking people to repeat

If people do not hear or understand what is said, they may say Sorry?

(BrE), What? (informal), (I beg your) pardon? or Pardon me? (AmE).

Mike's on the phone.*Sorry?*I said Mike's on the phone.

See you tomorrow. * What?* See you tomorrow.

You're going deaf. * I beg your pardon?    ►

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark58>>9 journeys etc

Common ways of wishing people a good journey are:

Have a good trip.    Have a good journey. (BrE)

Safe journey home. (BrE)

After a journey (for example when we meet people at the airport or
station), we may say:

Did you have a good joumey/tripiflight?

How was the journeyltriplflight?

If somebody is leaving for an evening out or some kind of pleasant
event, people might say Have a good time! or Enjoy yourself! (especially
in American English sometimes just Enjoy!). Good lucid is used before
examinations or other difficult or dangerous events.

When people return home, their friends or family may say Welcome back!
home.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark59>>10    holidays

Before somebody starts a holiday, we may say:

Have a good holiday. (AmE ... vacation.) or Have a good time.

When the holiday is over, we may say:

Did you have a good holiday/vacation?

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark60>>11    meals

We do not have fixed expressions for the beginnings and ends of meals.
It is common for guests or family members to say something complimentary
about the food during the meal (for example This is very nice), and
after (for example That was lovely!delicious; thank you very much). Some
religious people say ‘grace' (a short prayer) before and after meals.
Waiters often say Enjoy your meal after serving a customer.

For the names of meals, see 347.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark61>>12    drinking

When people begin drinking alcoholic drinks socially, they often raise
their glasses and say something. Common expressions are Cheers! (BrE)
and Your health! When we drink to celebrate an occasion (such as a
birthday, a wedding or a promotion), we often say Here's to .../

Here's to Betty!

Here's to the new job!    Here's to the happy couple!

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark62>>13    sending good wishes

Typical expressions are Give my best wishes! regards!greetings!love to
X, Remember me to X, Say hello to X for me. When the wishes are passed
on, common expressions are X sends his! her best wishes! regards etc, X
says hello.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark63>>14    sympathy

Common formulae in letters of sympathy (for example on somebody's death)
are I was very! terribly/extremely sorry to hear about... and Please
accept my deepest sympathy.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark64>>15    invitations and visits

Invitations often begin:

Would you like to ...?

Possible replies:

Thank you very much. That would be very nice/lovely: (formal)

Thanks, that would be great (informal)

Sorry. Vm afraid Vm not free.

It is normal to thank people for hospitality at the moment of leaving
their houses.

Thank you very much. That was a wonderful evening.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark65>>16    offers and replies

Offers often begin Would you like... ? or Can! May I get! offer you ...?
(more formal). Offers to do things for people can begin Would you like
me to ...?, Can! May I...? or Shall I...? (mainly BrE). Typical replies
are Yes please,

No thank you; Thanks, Vd love some; I'd love to; Thafs very nice! kind
of you. Note that thank you can be used for accepting as well as
refusing.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark66>>17    asking for things

We normally ask for things by using yes! no questions, (see 435).

Could you lend me a pen? (not Please-lend-me a pen.)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark67>>18    handing over things

We do not have an expression which is automatically used when we hand
over things. We sometimes say Here you are, especially when we want to
attract people's attention to the fact that we are passing something to
them.

Have you got a map of London?*! think so. Yes, here you are. * Thanks.
There you go is also possible in this situation, especially in AmE.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark68>>19    thanks

Common ways of thanking people are:

Thank you.    Thanks very much t a lot (not Thank you a lot)

Thank you very much. Cheers, (informal BrE)

Thanks. (informal)

Possible replies to thanks are:

Not at all    You're welcome.

Don't mention it    That's (quite) all right

That's OK. (informal) No problem. (informal)

But note that British people do not always reply to thanks, especially
thanks for small things.

For more information about thanking and the use of please, see 433.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark69>>20    sleep

When somebody goes to bed, people often say Sleep well In the morning,
we may ask Did you sleep well? or How did you sleep?

For expressions used when telephoning, see 578.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark70>>546 some

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark71>>1    meaning: indefinite quantity/number

Some is a determiner (see 154). It often suggests an indefinite quantity
or number, and is used when it is not important to say exactly how
much/many we are thinking of.

I need some new clothes.    Would you like some tea?

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark72>>2    pronunciation

When some has this indefinite meaning, it usually has a ‘weak'
pronunciation /s(a)m/ before (adjective +) noun.

some /s(a)m/ new clothes some /s(a)m/ tea

For more about 'strong* and 'weak' pronunciations, see 616.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark73>>3    some and any

With this meaning, some is most common in affirmative clauses, and in
questions which expect or encourage the answer ‘Yes'. In other cases,
any is generally used. For details, see 547. Compare:

-    There are some children at the front door.

Do you mind if I put some music on?

-    Did you meet any interesting people on holiday?

She hasn't got any manners.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark74>>4    some and a/an

Some (in this sense) is used in similar ways to the indefinite article
a!an (see 65). However, it is not normally used with the same kind of
nouns. Compare: I need a new coat, (singular countable noun) (not ...
some new coat:)

I need some new shirts, (plural countable noun)

I need some help. (uncountable noun)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark75>>5    when some is not used

With an uncountable or plural noun, some usually suggests the idea of an
indefinite (but not very large) quantity or number. When there is no
idea of a limited quantity or number, we do not usually use some. For
details, see 67. Compare:

-    We've planted some roses in the garden, (a limited number)

I like roses. (no idea of number)

-    Bring some food in case we get hungry.

The President has appealed for food for the earthquake victims.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark76>>6    some and some of, some with no
following noun

Before another determiner (article, demonstrative or possessive word) or
a pronoun, we use some of Compare:

-    Vve got tickets for some concerts next month, (not .. .-some of
concerts...) Pete's coming to some of the concerts. (not .. .-some- the
concerts ...)

-    Some people want to get to sleep, (not ... some of people...)

Some of us want to get to sleep, (not Some us...)

Nouns can be dropped after some, if the meaning is clear.

Vve got too many strawberries. Would you like some?

Before of, or with no following noun, some is pronounced /sAm/. some
/SAm/of us Would you like some /SAm/?

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark77>>7    contrast with others etc

Some (pronounced /SAm/) can have a more emphatic meaning, contrasting
with others, all or enough.

Some people like the sea; others prefer the mountains.

Some of us were late, but we were all there by ten o'clock.

Vve got some money, but not enough.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark78>>8    an unknown person or thing

Some (/SAm/) can refer to an unknown person or thing (usually with a
singular countable noun).

Some idiot has taken the bath plug.

There must be some job I could do.

She's living in some village in Yorkshire.

We can use this structure to suggest that we are not interested in
somebody or something, or that we do not think much of him/her/it.

Mary's gone to America to marry some sheep farmer or other.

I don't want to spend my life doing some boring little office job.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark79>>9    some party!

In informal speech, some can show enthusiastic appreciation.

It was some party!

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark80>>10 with numbers

Some (/SAm/) with a number suggests that the number is high or
impressive. We have exported some four thousand tons of bootlaces this
year.

For somebody and anybody, something and anything etc, see 546.

For some time, sometime and sometimes, see 549.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark81>>547 some and any

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark82>>1    indefinite quantities

Both some (see 546) and any (see 55) can refer to an indefinite quantity
or number. They are used when it is not easy, or not important, to say
exacdy how much/many we are thinking of.

I need to buy some new clothes. Is there any milk left?

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark83>>2    the difference

Some is most common in affirmative clauses. Any (used in this sense) is
a ‘non-affirmative* word (see 381), and is common in questions and
negatives. Compare:

I want some razor blades, (not I- want-any razor blades.)

Have you got any razor blades?

Sorry, I haven't got any razor blades, (not Sorry, I haven't got
some...)

For other uses of any, see 55.    ►

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark84>>3    some in questions

We use some in questions if we expect people to answer ‘Yes', or want to
encourage them to say ‘Yes' - for example in offers and requests.

Have you brought some paper and a pen?

(The hearer is expected to bring them.)

Shouldn't there be some instructions with it?

Would you like some more meat?

Could I have some brown rice, please?

Have you got some glasses that I could borrow?

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark85>>4    any in affirmative clauses

We use any in affirmative clauses after words that have a negative or
limiting meaning: for example never, hardly, without, little.

You never give me any help. I forgot to get any bread There's hardly any
tea left We got there without any trouble.

There is little point in doing any more work now.

For the ‘free choice' use of any (e.g. Any child could do this), see 55.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark86>>5    if- clauses

Both some and any are common in if-clauses.

If you want somefany help, let me know.

Sometimes any is used to suggest ‘if there is/are any'.

Any cars parked in this road will be towed away.

(= If there are any cars parked in this road, they will...)

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark87>>548 somebody, someone, anybody, anyone etc

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark88>>1    -body and -one

There is no significant difference between somebody and someone, anybody
and anyone, everybody and everyone or nobody and no one. The -one forms
are more common in writing; the -body forms are more frequent in speech
in British English.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark89>>2    some- and any-

The differences between somebody and anybody, something and anything,
somewhere and anywhere etc are the same as the differences between some
and any (see 547 for details). Compare:

-    There's somebody at the door. - Can I get you something to drink?

Did anybody telephone?    If you need something/anything,

just shout

-    Let's go somewhere nice for dinner.

I don't want to gp anywhere too expensive.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark90>>3    singular

When these words are subjects they are used with singular verbs.

Everybody likes her. (not Everybody like her.)

Is everything ready? (not Are-everything ready?)

Somebody normally refers to only one person. Compare:

There's somebody outside who wants to talk to you.

There are some people outside who want to talk to you.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark91>>4    use of they

They, them and their are often used with a singular meaning to refer
back to somebody etc (see 528).

If anybody wants a ticket for the concert, they can get it from my
office. There's somebody at the door. * Tell them Tm busy:

Someone left their umbrella on the bus. Nobody phoned, did they?

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark92>>5    complementation: somebody nice, etc

Somebody etc can be followed by adjectives or adverbial expressions.

I hope he marries somebody nice.

She's going to meet someone in the Ministry.

I feel like eating something hot.

Let's go somewhere quiet this weekend.

They can also be followed by else (see 183).

Mary - are you in love with somebody else?

I don't like this place - let's go somewhere else.

Note also the informal use of much after any- and no We didn't do
anything much yesterday.

There's nothing much on TV tonight.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark93>>6    someplace

Someplace is common in informal American English.

Let's go someplace quiet.

<<main-35.xhtml#bookmark94>>7    anyone and any one; everyone and every
one

Anyone means the same as anybody, any one means ‘any single one (person
or thing)'. Compare:

Does anyone know where Celia lives?

You can borrow any one book at a time.

There is a similar difference between everyone and every one. Compare:
Everyone had a good time at the party.

There aren't any cakes left - they've eaten every one.

For the difference between no one and none, see 380.

For question tags after everything and nothing, see 488.

For some time, sometime and sometimes, see 549.

<<main-36.xhtml>>

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark0>>549 some time, sometime and sometimes

Some time (with two stresses: /'SAm *tann/) means ‘quite a long time'.

Tm afraid it'll take some time to repair your car.

She's lived in Italy for some time, so she speaks Italian quite well
Sometime (/'SAintaim/) refers to an indefinite time, usually in the
future; it often means ‘one day\ It can also be written as two words:
some time.

Let's have dinner together sometime next week.

When will I get married - this year, next year, sometime, never?    ►

Sometimes (/'SAmtaimz/) is an adverb of frequency (see 24). It means ‘on
some occasions', ‘more than once' (past, present or future).

I sometimes went skiing when I lived in Germany.

Sometimes, in the long winter evenings, I just sit and think about life.

For sometimes and once, see 393

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark1>>550    soon, early and quickly

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark2>>1    soon

Soon means 'a short time after now' or ‘a short time after then*.

Get well soon, (not Get well early.)

The work was hard at the beginning, but she soon got used to it.

For no sooner... than, see 233.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark3>>2    early

The adverb early means ‘near the beginning of the time-period that we
are thinking about'. It does not usually mean ‘a short time after
now/then'. Early that week, Luke was called to the police station.

We usually take our holidays early in the year, (not .. .-soortin the
year;) I usually get up early and go to bed early (not I-usually get
up-soon-...) Sometimes early means ‘before the expected time'.

The plane arrived twenty minutes early.

Early can also be used as an adjective.

I caught an early train. You're very early.

In a formal style, the adjective early can sometimes have the same kind
of meaning as soon.

I should be grateful for an early reply.

Best wishes for an early recovery.

A watch or clock is fast or slow, not early or late.

My watch is five minutes fast.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark4>>3    quickly

Quickly refers to the speed with which something is done. Compare:

-    Come and see us quickly. (= Hurry - make the arrangements fast.)

Come and see us soon. (= Come and see us before long.)

-    He did the repair quickly but not very well

I hope you can do the repair soon - / need the car.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark5>>551    sort of, kind of and type of

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark6>>1 articles

The article at an is usually dropped after sort of kind of and type of
but structures with articles are possible in an informal style.

That's a funny sort of (a) car. What sort of (a) bird is that?

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark7>>2    singular and plural; these sort of etc

When we are talking about one sort of thing, we can use sort of, kind of
ox type of followed by a singular noun.

This sort of car is enormously expensive to run.

Vm interested in any new type of development in computer science.
Singular sort of kind of and type of can also be followed by plural
nouns, especially in an informal style.

Vm interested in any new kind of developments...

Plural demonstratives (these and those) can also be used.

These sort of cars are enormously expensive to run.

Do you smoke those kind of cigarettes?

This structure is often felt to be incorrect, and is usually avoided in
a formal style. This can be done by using a singular noun (see above),
by using plural sorts!kinds! types, or by using the structure... of
this!that sort!kind!type.

This sort of car is...

These kinds of car(s) are... Cars of that type are...

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark8>>3    softeners

In an informal style, sort of and kind of can be used before almost any
word or expression, or at the end of a sentence, to show that we are not
speaking very exactly, or to make what we say less definite.

We sort of thought you might forget.

Sometimes I sort of wonder whether I shouldn't sort of get a job.

Vve had sort of an idea about what we could do.

She's kind of strange. fve changed my mind, kind of

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark9>>552    sound

Sound is a link verb (see 328). It is followed by adjectives, not
adverbs.

You sound unhappy. What's the matter?

Progressive forms are not very common.

Your idea sounds great, (not Your idea's sounding great.)

However, progressive forms are possible when there is an idea of change.

The car sounds / is sounding a bit rough these days.

Sound is often followed by like or as iflthough.

That sounds like Bill coming up the stairs.

It sounds as iflthough he's had a hard day.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark10>>553    speak and talk

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark11>>1    little difference

There is litle difference between speak and talk. In certain situations
one or the other is preferred, but they are usually both possible.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark12>>2    formality

Talk is the more usual word for informal communication.

When she walked into the room everybody stopped talking.

Could I talk to you about the football match for a few minutes?    ►

Speak is often used for communication in more serious or formal
situations. I'll have to speak to that boy - he's getting very lazy.

They had a row last week, and now they're not speaking to one another.
After she had finished reading the letter, nobody spoke.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark13>>3    lectures etc

Talk is often used for the act of giving an informal lecture (a talk);
speak is preferred for more formal lectures, sermons etc. Compare:

This is Patrick Allen, who's going to talk to us about gardening.

This is Professor Rosalind Bowen, who is going to speak to us on recent
developments in low-temperature physics.

The Pope spoke to the crowd for seventy minutes about world peace.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark14>>4    languages

Speak is the usual word to refer to knowledge and use of languages, and
to the physical ability to speak.

She speaks three languages fluently.

We spoke French so that the children wouldn't understand.

His throat operation has left him unable to speak

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark15>>5    other cases

One usually asks to speak to somebody on the phone (AmE also speak
with).

Hello. Could I speak to Karen, please?

Talk is used before sense, nonsense and other words with similar
meanings. You're talking complete nonsense, as usual (not
You\^re-speaking complete nonsense...)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark16>>554 speech (1): stress and rhythm

Stress and rhythm are important elements in English pronunciation. If
learners pronounce all the syllables in a sentence too regularly, with
the same force and at the same speed, they can be quite hard for English
speakers to understand. And if learners are not sensitive to English
stress and rhythm, they may not perceive unstressed syllables
(especially ‘weak forms' - see 616) at all, and this may make it
difficult for them to follow natural English speech.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark17>>1    stress

Stress is the word for the ‘strength' with which syllables are
pronounced. In speech, some parts of English words and sentences sound
louder than others. For example, the first syllable of CARpet, the
second syllable of inSPECtion or the last syllable of conFUSE are
usually stressed, while the other syllables in these words are not. In
the sentence Don't look at HIM - HE didn't do it, the words him and he
are stressed in order to emphasise them. Stressed syllables are not only
louder; they may also have longer vowels, and they may be pronounced on
a higher musical pitch.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark18>>2    word stress

English words with more than one syllable mosdy have a fixed stress
pattern. There are not many rules to show which syllable of a word will
be stressed: one

usually has to leam the stress pattern of a word along with its meaning,
spelling and pronunciation Examples:

Stressed on first syllable:

AFter, CApital, HAPpen, Exercise, EAsy Stressed on second syllable:

inSTEAD, proNOUNCE, aGREEment, parricularly Stressed on third syllable:

enterTAJN, underSTAND, concenTRAtion The stressed syllable of a word is
the one that can carry an intonation movement (see 555 below).

Many short phrases also have a fixed stress pattern. front DOOR (not
FRONT door)

Living room (not living room)

Related words can have different stress patterns. to inCREASE an
iNcrease PHOtograph phoTOgrapher photoCRAphic A good dictionary will
show how words and common phrases are stressed.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark19>>3    variable stress

Some words have variable stress. In these, the stress is at or near the
end when the word is spoken alone, but it can move to an earlier
position when the word is in a sentence, especially if another stressed
word follows. Compare:

-    afterNOON (stress at the end)

It's time for my A Ftemoon sleep. (stress at the beginning)

-    JapanESE jApanese cooking

-    nineTEEN

The year NlNEteen TWENty Many short phrases - for instance, two-word
verbs - have variable stress.

-    Their marriage broke up.

Money problems BROKE up their marriage.

-    Do sit DOWN.

She sat down and cried.

-    Ifs dark BLUE.

a dark blue suit

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark20>>4    stress and pronunciation

Unstressed syllables nearly always have one of two vowels: /i/ (in
unstressed prefixes written with e, like de-_{t} re-, pre-> ex-) or /a/
(in other cases).

Compare the first syllables in the following pairs of words:

-    PREference f/'prefrans/J - cONfident f/'konfidant/) preFER
f/pri'f3:(r)/J    cohfused f/kan'fju:zd/)

-    Expert r/'eksp3:t/J    - PARticle f/'paitikl/) exPERience
f/ik'spiarians/J parricular f/pa'tikjala(r)/J

Many short words (mostly pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions and
auxiliary verbs) have two quite different pronunciations: a normal
‘weak* unstressed form, and a ‘strong' form used when the word has
special stress. (For details, see 616.)

I was r/waz/J here first.* No you weren't. * Yes I was f/wnz/J.    ►

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark21>>5    emphatic and contrastive stress

Stress is often used to emphasise one part of a sentence, perhaps to
make a contrast Compare these three ways of saying the same words:

Their ELDER daughter went to Cambridge. (Not their younger daughter.)
Their elder DAUGHTER went to Cambridge. (Not their elder son.)

Their elder daughter went to CAMBRIDGE. (Not another university.)

For more about emphasis, see 184.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark22>>6    stress in sentences; rhythm

Rhythm is the word for the way stressed and unstressed syllables make
patterns in speech. In sentences, we usually give more stress to nouns,
ordinary verbs, adjectives and adverbs, and less stress to pronouns,
determiners, prepositions, conjunctions and auxiliary verbs.

She was SURE that the BACK of the CAR had been DAMaged.

Stressed syllables are pronounced more slowly and clearly, and (in the
opinion of some linguists) follow each other at roughly regular
intervals. Unstressed syllables are pronounced more quickly and less
clearly, and are fitted in between the stressed syllables. Compare the
following two sentences. The second does not take much longer to say
than the first: although it has three more unstressed syllables, it has
the same number of stressed syllables.

She knew the Doctor. She KNEW that there was a Doctor.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark23>>555 speech (2): intonation

Intonation is the word for the ‘melody* of spoken language: the way the
musical pitch of the voice rises and falls. Intonation systems in
languages are very complicated and difficult to analyse, and linguists
do not all agree about how English intonation works.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark24>>1    intonation in conversation

One use of intonation is to show how a piece of information fits in with
what comes before and after. For instance, a speaker may raise his or
her voice when taking over the conversation from somebody else, or to
indicate a change of subject. A rise or fall on a particular word may
show that this is the 'centre* of the message - the place where the new
information is being given; or it may signal a contrast or a special
emphasis. A rising tone at the end of a sentence may suggest that there
is more to be said and perhaps invite another speaker to take over.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    attitude

Intonation (together with speed, voice quality and loudness) can also
say things about the speaker's attitude. For instance, when people are
excited or angry they often raise and lower their voices more.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark26>>3    three patterns

There are three particularly common intonation patterns in English
speech.

a falling intonation

A falling intonation can suggest that we are saying something definite,
complete. The voice falls on the last stressed syllable of a group of
words.

I'm tired. Here's your dictionary. Sally couldn't find him.

A falling intonation is also common in u/fr-questions.

What time's the last bus? Where's the secretary?

b rising intonation

A rising intonation is common in yeslno questions. The voice rises at
the end of a group of words, beginning on the last stressed syllable.

Are you tired? Is that the secretary? Did he post it?

In ‘alternative questions' with or, the voice rises on the first part of
the question and falls on the second part.

Are you staying or going? c fall-rise

A fall-rise intonation suggests that something is incomplete, or
uncertain, or that there is more to be said.

I'm tired. (perhaps suggesting But maybe I'll go out with you anyway.)

I don't play tennis. (perhaps suggesting But I do play other games.)

She's quite a good teacher. (perhaps suggesting But I'm not completely
happy with her.)

The first week was good, (perhaps suggesting But not the second.)

Is this all you've written? (perhaps suggesting I was expecting more.)

A fall-rise makes questions sound more interested or friendly. It is
common in polite requests and invitations.

Where's the secretary? Please come in.    Is this your car?

What's your name?    Some more potatoes?    ►

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark27>>4 intonation and misunderstandings

If a statement is made on a rising intonation, it may be misunderstood
as a question.

That's our train. * I don't know. * Yes, it is, Vm telling you.

If a declarative question (see 481) is made on a falling intonation, it
may be misunderstood as a statement.

That's our train?* Is it?*No, Tm asking you.

A falling intonation can also turn a polite request into an order.

Can I have some more coffee?* At once, Your Majesty.

A fall-rise in the wrong place can be misunderstood as suggesting more
than is

said.    \_\_\__{w}

Vd like to play tennis.* So what's the problem? * There's no problem.

For intonation in question tags, see 487.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark28>>556 spelling (1): capital letters

We use capital (big) letters at the beginning of the following kinds of
words:

a the names of days, months and public holidays (but not usually
seasons) Sunday March    Easter

Tuesday September Christmas (BUT normally summer, autumn)

b the names of people, institutions and places, including stars and
planets John    Mary    the Smiths

the Foreign Office North Africa Canada the United States The Ritz Hotel
Oxford University The Super Cinema the Far East (compare He teaches at
the Pole Star    Mars    a university)

(BUT normally the earth, the sun, the moon)

Words derived from people's names have capitals if they refer to the
people. Shakespearean drama (BUT to pasteurise: this refers to a
chemical process, not direcdy to the scientist Pasteur)

c people's tides

Mr Smith    Professor Blake

Colonel Webb the Managing Director Dr Jones

the Prime Minister is attending the summit

(Compare How is the French prime minister elected?)

d nouns and adjectives referring to nationalities and regions,
languages, ethnic groups and religions

He's Russian.    I speak German. Japanese history

Catalan cooking She's Jewish.    He's a Sikh.

e the names of newspapers and magazines International Herald Tribune New
Scientist

f the first word (and often other important words) in the titles of
books, films and plays

The Spy who Loved Me Gone with the Wind A Midsummer Night's Dream

For the use of capitals with East, North etc, see 172.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark29>>557    spelling (2): -ly

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark30>>1    adverb formation

We normally change an adjective into an adverb by adding -ly. late ->
lately    real -> really (not reafy)

right -* rightly    definite -> definitely

hopeful -> hopefully pale -> palely complete -> completely (not
completly)

Exceptions:

true -> truly whole -> wholly due -* duly full -> fully

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark31>>2    -y and -/-

-y usually changes to (see 561).

happy -> happily dry -> drily or dryly easy easily    gay -> gai/y

Exceptions:

sfry -> shyly sly -► s/y/y coy -» coy/y

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark32>>3    adjectives ending in consonant + le

-le changes to -ly after a consonant.

idle -► idly noble -► nobly able -*>

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark33>>4    adjectives ending in -ic

If an adjective ends in -ic, the adverb ends in -ically (pronounced
/ikli/), tragic -> tragically phonetic -> phonetically

Exception:

public -> publicly

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark34>>558    spelling (3): -ise and -ize

Many English verbs can be spelt with either -ise or -ize. In American
English,

-ize is preferred in these cases. Examples:

realise/realize (BrE)    realize (AmE)

mechanise/ mechanize (BrE)    mechanize (AmE)

computerise! computerize (BrE) computerize (AmE) baptise/baptize (BrE)
   baptize (AmE)

Most words of two syllables, and a few longer words, have -ise in both
British and American English. Examples:

surprise (not surprize)    despise    supervise

revise    compromise    televise

advise    exercise    advertise

comprise    improvise

Capsize has -ize in both British and American English.

Note also analyse (AmE analyse!analyze) and paralyse (AmE paralyze).

If in doubt, remember that in British English -ise is almost always
acceptable. For American English, consult an American dictionary.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark35>>559 spelling (4): hyphens

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    What are hyphens?

Hyphens are the short lines (-) that we put between words in expressions
like ticket-office or ex-husband.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    When are hyphens used?

Hyphens are most common in the following cases: a compound nouns

•    compound nouns where the second part ends in -er

lorry-driver bottle-opener

•    compound nouns where the first part ends in -ing

waiting-room writing-paper

•    compound nouns made with prepositions and adverb particles

sister-in-law make-up in-joke

•    many compounds of two nouns, where the first noun has the main
stress (but hyphens are becoming less common in these cases)

^{1}water-bottle OR ^{%}water bottle

^{1}apple-tree OR 'apple tree but apple *pie

b compound adjectives

red-hot nice-looking    the London-Paris flight

blue-eyed grey-green    the Scotland-France match broken-hearted

When we use a longer phrase    as an adjective before a noun, we often
use hyphens. Compare:

- an out-of-work miner.    - a shoot-to-kiU policy

He's out of work    They were ordered to shoot to kill

c compound verbs beginning with a noun baby-sit house-hunt

The prefixes anti-, co-, ex-, mid-, non-, pre-, post-, pro- and self-
are often separated from what follows by hyphens.

anti-war mid-term    post-publication

co-producer non-involvement pro-hunting ex-husband pre-meeting
   self-study

And other prefixes may be separated by hyphens in order to avoid unusual
or misleading combinations of letters.

un-American re-examine counter-revolution

e numbers 21-99; fractions

twenty-one thirty-six two-thirds

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark38>>3    word division

We also use hyphens to separate the parts of long words at the end of
written or printed lines. (To see where to divide words, look in a good
dictionary.) ...is not completely in accordance with the policy of the
present government, which was...

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark39>>4    Are hyphens disappearing?

The rules about hyphens are complicated, and usage is not very clear.
Perhaps because of this, people seem to be using hyphens less,
especially in compound nouns. Many common short compounds are now often
written ‘solid', with no division between the words (e.g. weekend,
wideawake, takeover)] other less common or longer compounds are now more
likely to be written as completely separate words (e.g. train driver,
living room). The situation at present is rather confused, and it is not
unusual to find the same expression spelt in three different ways (e.g.
bookshop, book-shop, book shop). If one is not sure whether to use a
hyphen between words or not, the best thing is to look in a dictionary,
or to write the words without a hyphen.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark40>>560 spelling (5): final e

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark41>>1 final -e dropped before vowels

When an ending that begins with a vowel (e.g. -ing_{y} -able_{t} -ous)
is added to a word that ends in -e, we usually drop the -e.

hope -* hoping note -> notable shade -► shady make -> making fame ->
famous Some words that end in -e have two possible forms before -able
and -age. The form without -e is more common in most cases. Note:
likeable (usually with e) mov(e)able (both forms common) mileage (only
with e)

Final -e is not dropped from words ending in -ee> -oe or -ye. see seeing
   canoe -> canoeist

agree -> agreeable dye -* dyeing    ►

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark42>>2 final -e not dropped before consonants

Before endings that begin with a consonant, final -e is not normally
dropped. excite -► excitement complete -> completeness definite ->
definitely Exceptions: words ending in ~ue

due -► duly true -► truly argue -> argument In words that end with -ce
or -ge, we do not drop -e before a or o. replace -► replaceable courage
-*■ courageous (BUT charge -> charging, face -> facing)

Judg(e)ment and acknowledgement can be spelt with or without the -e
after g.

For words ending in -ie, see 561.5. For adverbs ending in -ly. see 557.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark43>>561 spelling (6): y and i

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark44>>1    changing y to #

When we add an ending to a word that ends in ~y, we usually change -y to
hurry -> hurried jury -> furious merry -> merriment marry -> marriage
easy -> easier busy -> business happy -* happily

Generally, nouns and verbs that end in -y have plural or third person
singular forms in -ies.

story -► stories spy -*• spies hurry -> hurries

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark45>>2    exceptions

Two spellings are possible for the nouns flyer!flier.

A machine that dries things is a dryer.

Words formed from the adjective dry. normally drier, driest, dryly!
drily, dryness.

Words formed from the adjective sly. slyer, slyest, slyly, slyness.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark46>>3    no change before /

We do not change -y to before i (for example when we add -ing, -ism,
-ish, -ise).

try -> trying Tory -> Toryism baby -*• babyish

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark47>>4    no change after a vowel

We do not change -y to -z- after a vowel letter. buy -> buying    play
-> played

enjoy -*• enjoyment    grey -*■ greyish

Exceptions:

say -*■ said pay -> paid lay -*• laid

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark48>>5    changing /e to y

We change -ie to -y- before -ing. die -> dying lie -> lying (but dye -►
dyeing)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark49>>562 spelling (7): doubling final consonants

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark50>>1    doubling before vowels

We sometimes double the final consonant of a word before adding -ed,
-er, -est, -ing, -able, -y (or any other ending that begins with a
vowel). stop -► stopped sit -> sitting big -* bigger

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark51>>2    Which consonants are doubled?

We double the following letters:

b: rub -> rubbing    n: win winnable

d: sad -> sadder    p: stop -» stopped

g: big -> bigger    r. prefer -> preferred

I: travel -> travelling    r. sif -> sitting

mislim -> slimming

We double final -5 in gassing; gassed (but not usually in other words),
final -z in quizzes, fezzes, and final -/in (flfy (a colloquial word for
‘questionable^{1}, ‘uncertain*).

Final w (in words like show, flow) is part of a vowel sound, and is not
doubled. show showing; flow -> flowed (not showwing, flow wed)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark52>>3    only at the end of a word

We only double consonants that come at the end of a word. Compare: hop
hopping but hope -> hoping fat J&tter BUT /ate -*• later plan planned
but phone -> phoned

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark53>>4    one consonant after one vowel letter

We only double when the word ends in one consonant after one vowel
letter. Compare:

fat Jfctter but Jfcsf -»• faster (not fastter) bet betting BUT freat ->
beating (not beatting)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark54>>5    only stressed syllables

We only double consonants in stressed syllables. We do not double in
longer words that end in unstressed syllables. Compare: up'set
up'setting BUT 'visit-* 'visiting be'gin -> be'ginning BUT *open ->
'opening refer -» referring but ‘offer -> 'offering Note the spelling of
these words:

^{1}gallop -> ‘galloping -> 'galloped (not gattoppnrtg, gallopped)
de'velop -> developing -> developed (not developping, developped)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark55>>6    exception: final / in unstressed
syllables

In British English, we double -/ at the end of a word after one vowel
letter, in most cases, even in unstressed syllables.

'travel -» 'travelling 'equal -* ■equalled

In American English, words like this are most often spelt with one /:
traveling.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark56>>7    other exceptions

Consonants are sometimes doubled at the end of final syllables that are
pronounced with full vowels (e.g. /ae/), even when these do not carry
the main stress.

' kidnap -*• 'kidnapped

'handicap -*• 'handicapped

■worship -► 'worshippers (AmE also ‘worshipers)

^{1}combat -► *combating or 'combatting Final -s is sometimes doubled in
focus(s)ing and ^{,}focus(s)ed

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark57>>8    final c

Final -c changes to ck before -ed, -er, -ing etc. picnic -> picnickers
panic -► panicking mimic -> mimicked

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark58>>9    Why double?

The reason for doubling is to show that a vowel is pronounced short.
This is because, in the middle of a word, a stressed vowel letter before
one consonant is usually pronounced as a long vowel or as a diphthong
(double vowel). Compare:

hoping /'haupii]/    hopping /'hnpii]/

later /'leita(r) /    latter /‘laeta(r) /

diner /'dame(r)/    dinner /'dma(r)/

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark59>>563    spelling (8): ch and tch, k and ck

After one vowel, at the end of a word, we usually write -ck and -tch for
the sounds /k/ and /tj/.

back neck sick lock stuck catch fetch stitch botch hutch

Exceptions:

yak tic public (and many other words ending in -ic) rich which such much
attach detach

After a consonant or two vowels, we write -k and -ch. bank work talk
march bench break book week peach coach

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark60>>564    spelling (9): ie and ei

The sound /ir/ (as in believe) is often written ie, but not usually ei.
However, we write ei after c for this sound. English-speaking children
leam a rhyme:

*i before e, except after c\

believe chief field grief piece shield ceiling deceive receive receipt

Exceptions: seize, Neil, Keith.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark61>>565 spelling (10): spelling and
pronunciation

In many English words, the spelling is different from the pronunciation.
This is mainly because our pronunciation has changed a good deal over
the last few hundred years, while our spelling system has stayed more or
less the same. Here is a list of some difficult common words with their
pronunciations.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark62>>1    usually two syllables, not three

The letters in brackets are usually not pronounced. asp(i)rin    ev(e)ry
   om(e)lette

bus(i)ness    ev(e)ning    rest(au)rant

choc(o)late    marri(a)ge    sev(e)ral

diff(e)rent    med(i)cine (AmE three syllables)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark63>>2    usually three syllables, not four

The letters in brackets are usually not pronounced. comf(or)table
   temp(e)rature

int(e)resting    us(u)ally

secret(a)ry (AmE four syllables) veg(e)table

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark64>>3    silent letters

The letters in brackets are not pronounced.

•    clim(b) com(b) dum(b) dou(b)t de(b)t

•    mus(c)le

•    han(d) kerchief san(d)wich We(d)ne$day

•    champa(g)ne forei(g)n si(g)n

•    bou(gh)t cau(gh)t ou(gh)t thou(gh)t borou(gh)

dau(gh)ter hei(gh)t hi(gh) li(gh)t mi(gh)t nei(gh)bour ni(gh)t ri(gh)t
strai(gh)t throu(gh) ti(gh)t wei(gh)

•    w(h)at w(h)en w(h)ere w(h)ether w(h)ich w(h)ip w(h)y

and similarly in other words beginning wha> whe or whi. (Some speakers
use an unvoiced /w/ in these words.)

•    (h)onest (h)onour (h)our

•    (k)nee (k)nife (k)nob (k)nock (k) now and similarly in other words
beginning kn.

•    ca(l)m cou(l)d ha(l)f sa(l)mon shou(l)d ta(l)k wa(l)k wou(l)d autum
(n) hym(n)

•    (p)neumatic (p)sychiatrist (p)sychology (p)sychotherapy
(p)terodactyl and similarly in other words beginning pn, ps or pt.

•    cu(p)board /'kAbad/

•    i(r)on (British pronunciation /aian/)

•    i(s)land i(s)le

•    cas(t)le Chris(t)mas fas(t)en lis(t)en of(t)en whis(t)le (Often can
also be pronounced /'nftan/.)

•    g(u)arantee g(u)ard g(u)errilla g(u)ess g(u)est g(u)ide g(u)ilt
g(u)itar g(u)y

•    (w)rap (w)rite (w)rong

•    (w)ho (w)hom (w)hore (w)hose (w)hole

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark65>>4    a = /e/

any many Thames /temz/    ►

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark66>>5    ch = /Is./

ache archaeology architect chaos character chemist Christmas mechanical
Michael stomach

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark67>>6    ea = /e/

already bread breakfast dead death dreadful dreamt head health heavy
instead lead (the metal) leant leather meant measure pleasant pleasure
read (past) ready steady sweater threat tread weather

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark68>>7    ea = /ei /

break great steak

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark69>>8    gh = /f/

cough /kDf/ draught /drarft/ enough /I'nAf/ laugh /laif/ rough /rAf/
tough /tAf/

9    0 = 1 A/

above brother colour come comfortable company cover done front glove
government honey London love lovely Monday money month mother none
nothing one onion other oven some son stomach ton (ne) tongue once won
wonder worry

10    o = /iu/

lose prove to

11    ou = / a/

country couple cousin double enough rough tough trouble young

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark70>>12    u or ou= /u/

bull bullet bush butcher could cushion full pull push put should would

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark71>>13    words pronounced with /ai/

biology buy dial height idea iron microphone science society either
(many British speakers) neither (many British speakers)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark72>>14    other strange spellings

area /'eana/    friend /firend/

Australia /os'treilia/    fruit /firurt/

bicycle /'baisikl/    /leard /h3:d/

biscuit /‘biskit/    hearr /hait/

fe/ocM* /blAd/    juice /d3u:s/

brooch /brautJV    minute /'mmit/

business /'biznis/    moustache /ma'sta:J7 (AmE /'mAStaeJ/)

tusy /'bizi/    once /WAns/

clothes /klauSz/    one /WAn/

does /dAz/    theatre /'0iata(r)/

doesn't /'dAZ(e)nt/    two /tu:/

Edinburgh /'edmbra/    woman /'woman/

Europe /‘juarap/    women /'wimm/ foreign /'foran/

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark73>>15 silent r

In standard southern British English, r is not normally pronounced
before a consonant or at the end of a word.

tard /haid/ first /f3:st/ order /'o:da/ car /ka:/ /our /£>:/    more
/mo:/

But r is pronounced at the end of a word if a vowel follows immediately.
four islands /*fo:r 'ailandz/ more eggs /'mo:r 'egz/

Note the pronunciation of iron, and of words ending in -ered and -re.

/ron /aian/ (AmE /'arran/) wondered /'WAndad/ centre /'senta(r)/
   bothered /'bnSed/

theatre /'Oiata(r)/

We often add /r/ after words ending in the sound /a/ even when this is
not written with r, if another vowel follows immediately.

Zmfta and 4/h‘ca /'indiar and 'aefrike/

In most varieties of American English, and in many regional British
accents, r is pronounced whenever it is written.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark74>>566 still, yet and already: time

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark75>>1    meanings

Still, yet and already can all be used to talk about things which are
going on, or expected, around the present. Briefly:

-    still is used to say that something is continuing and has not
stopped

-    yet is used to talk about something that is expected

-    already is used to say that something has happened early, or
earlier than it might have happened.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark76>>2    still

Still is used to say that something has, perhaps surprisingly, not
finished. She's still asleep. Is it still raining?

I've been thinking for hours, but I still can't decide.

You're not still seeing that Jackson boy; are you?

Still usually goes with the verb, in ‘mid-position' (see 24).

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark77>>3    yet

Not yet is used to say that something which is expected has not happened
(but we think that it will).

Is Sally here? * Not yet.

The postman hasn't come yet In questions, we use yet to ask whether
something expected has happened.

Is supper ready yet? Has the postman come yet?

Yet usually goes at the end of a clause, but it can go immediately after
not in a formal style.    *

Don't eat the pears - they aren't ripe yet The pears are not yet ripe.
(more formal)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark78>>4    already

Already is used to say that something has happened earlier than
expected, or earlier than it might have happened.

When's Sally going to come?*She's already here.

You must go to Scotland *Vve already been.

Have you already finished? That was quick!

Already usually goes with the verb, in 'mid-position' (see 24.) It can
also go at the end of a clause, for emphasis.

Are you here already? You must have run all the way.

We do not usually put already before time expressions.

When I was fourteen I already knew that I wanted to be a doctor. (not
Already-when-Hvas fourteen -...)

In 1970 Britain's car industry was already in serious trouble, (not
Already in 1070...)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark79>>5    still not or not yet?

Still not looks back towards the past; not yet looks towards the future.
Compare:

-    She still hasn't got a job. (Looking back: she hasn't had a job
since

Christmas, and this situation is continuing.)

She hasn't got a job yet (Looking forward: she hasn't got a job now, but
we're hoping that she will get one.)

-    I still can't speak French, after all these years of study.

I can't speak French yet, but I hope I will be able to soon.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark80>>6    yet or already in questions

Questions with already often suggest that something has happened.
Compare:

-    Have you met Professor Hawkins yet? (= I don't know whether you've
met

him.)

Have you already met Professor Hawkins? (= I think you've probably met
him.)

-    Is my coat dry yet?

Is my coat dry already? That was quick!

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark81>>7    tenses

Various tenses are possible with all three words. In British English,
perfect tenses are common with already and yet_{t} Americans often
prefer past tenses. Compare:

-    Have you called the garage yet? (BrE) - She's already left. (BrE)

Did you call the garage yet? (AmE)    She already left. (AmE)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark82>>8    related to a past moment

All three words can be related to a past moment instead of to the
present.

I went to see if she had woken up yet, but she was still asleep. This
was embarrassing, because her friends had already arrived.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark83>>9 yet meaning 'still'

Yet is normally used in questions and negative sentences. But it is
sometimes used in affirmative sentences in a formal style to mean
'stilT.

We have yet to hear from the bank. (= We are still waiting to hear ...)

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark84>>10 all ready

All ready is not the same as already, it simply means the same as all +
ready. Compare:

When's Jane coming?* She's already arrived.

Are you all ready?*No, Pete isn't.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark85>>567 subjunctive

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark86>>1    What is the subjunctive?

Some languages have special verb forms called ‘subjunctive', which are
used especially to talk about ‘unreal' situations: things which are
possible, desirable or imaginary. Older English had subjunctives, but in
modern English they have mostly been replaced by uses of should, would
and other modal verbs, by special uses of past tenses (see 426), and by
ordinary verb forms. English only has a few subjunctive forms left:
third-person singular present verbs without -(e)s, (e.g. she see, he
have) and special forms of be (e.g. I be, he were). Except for It
he!she! it were sifter if, they are not very common.

<<main-36.xhtml#bookmark87>>2    that she see

Ordinary verbs only have one subjunctive form: a third person singular
present with no -(e)s (e.g. she see). It is sometimes used in
tfuzf-clauses in a formal style, especially in American English, after
words which express the idea that something is important or desirable
(e.g. suggest, recommend, ask, insist, vital, essential, important,
advice). The same forms are used in both present and past sentences.

It is essential that every child have the same educational
opportunities.

It was important that James contact Arthur as soon as possible.

Our advice is that the company invest in new equipment.

The judge recommended that Simmons remain in prison for life.

Do is not used in negative subjunctives. Note the word order.

We felt it desirable that he not leave school before eighteen.

With verbs that are not third-person singular, the forms are the same as
ordinary present-tense verbs (but they may refer to the past).

I recommended that you move to another office.

<<main-37.xhtml>>

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark0>>3    be

Be has special subjunctive forms: I be, you be etc.

It is important that Helen be present when we sign the papers.

The Director asked that he be allowed to advertise for more staff.

I were and hetshetit were, used for example after if (see 258.4) and
wish (see 630) in a formal style, are also subjunctives.

If I were you I should stop smoking.

I wish it were Saturday.    ►

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark1>>4    fixed phrases

Subjunctives are also used in certain fixed phrases. Examples:

God save the Queen! Long live the King!

God bless you.    Heaven forbid.

He's a sort of adopted uncle, as it were. (= ... in a way.)

Be that as it may... (= Whether that is true or not...)

If we have to pay £2,000, then so be it (= We can't do anything to
change it.)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark2>>5    other structures

Most subjunctive structures are formal and unusual in British English.
In that-clauses, British people usually prefer should + infinitive (see
521), or ordinary present and past tenses.

It is essential that every child should have the same educational
opportunities, (or ... that every child has ...)

It was important that James should contact Arthur as soon as possible,
(or ... that James contacted...)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark3>>568 such

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark4>>1    word order

Such is used with nouns and noun phrases. It comes before a!an. such
people such interesting ideas such a decision (not a such decision)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark5>>2    'of this/that kind'

Such can mean 'like this/that', *of this/that kind'. This is most common
in a formal style, with abstract nouns.

The committee wishes to raise fees. I would oppose such a decision.

There are various forms of secret writing. Such systems are called
‘codes'.

In an informal style, and with concrete nouns, we prefer like this! that
ox this/ that kind of

... systems like this are called...

He's got an old Rolls-Royce. Yd like a car like that (not b'dlike such
a-car.)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark6>>3    high degree

Another use of such is to talk about a high degree of some quality. In
this sense, such is common before adjective + noun.

I'm sorry you had such a bad journey.

(= You had a very bad journey, and I'm sorry.)

It was a pleasure to meet such interesting people.

Such is also possible with this meaning before a noun alone, when the
noun has an emphatic descriptive meaning.

I'm glad your concert was such a success.

Why did she make such a fuss about the dates?

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark7>>4    such and very, great etc

Very, great and similar words are also used to talk about a high degree
of some quality. The difference is that they give new information; such
(= like this/that) normally refers to information that is already known.
Compare:

-    I've had a very bad day. (giving information)

Why did you have such a bad day? (The information is already known.)

-    The weather was very cold

I wasn't expecting such cold weather.

-    There was great confusion Why was there such confusion?

However, in a very informal style such can also be used to mean Very' or
‘great*, especially in exclamations.

She has such a marvellous voice! He's such an idiot!

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark8>>5    such... that, such ... as to

Structures with very cannot be followed directly by tfuzf-clauses.
Instead, we can use such ... that.

It was such a cold afternoon that we stopped playing, (not It wets a
very-cold afternoon that...)

There is also a structure with such followed by... + as to + infinitive.
This is formal and not very common.

It was such a loud noise as to wake everybody in the house.

(Less formal:... such a loud noise that it woke...)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark9>>6    such as

Such as is used to introduce examples.

My doctor told me to avoid fatty foods such as bacon or hamburgers.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark10>>7    such-and-such

Note this informal expression.

She's always telling you that she's met such-and-such a famous person.

(= ... one or other famous person.)

For the difference between such and so, see 569.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark11>>569 such and so

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark12>>1 such before (adjective +) noun

We use such before a noun (with or without an adjective).

They're such fools. (not They're so fools.)

It was such good milk that we couldn't stop drinking it. (not H-was so
good milk that...)

Such comes before a!an.

She's such a baby.

I've never met such a nice person, (not ... a such/so nice person.)    ►

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark13>>2 so before adjective, adverb etc

We use so before an adjective alone (without a noun) or an adverb.

She's so babyish, (not She's suck babyish.)

The milk was so good that we couldn't stop drinking it.

Why do you talk so slowly?

We can also use so before much, many, few and little.

We've got so much to do, and so little time.

We use so much, not so, before comparatives.

I'm glad you're feeling so much better. (not ... so better.)

For so beautiful a day etc, see 14.

For more about the meaning and use of such, see 568. For more about so,
see 538.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark14>>570 suggest

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark15>>1    infinitive not used

Suggest is not followed by object + infinitive. That-clauses and -ing
structures are common.

Her uncle suggested that she (should) get a job in a bank.

Her uncle suggested getting a job in a bank, (not Her uncle
suggested-her-to get a job in a bank.)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark16>>2    indirect object not used

Suggest is not normally followed by an indirect object without a
preposition. Can you suggest a restaurant to us? (not Can you suggest us
a restaurant?)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark17>>3    verb forms in that-clauses

In tfzaf-clauses after suggest, various verb forms are possible when we
suggest what people should do.

a Ordinary present and past tenses can be used.

Her uncle suggests that she gets a job in a bank.

He suggested that she got a job in a bank.

b Should + infinitive without to is common.

He suggests that she should get a job in a bank.

He suggested that she should get a job in a bank.

c Subjunctives (see 567) are also used, especially in American English.

He suggests that she get a job in a bank.

He suggested that she get a job in a bank.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark18>>4    direct suggestions

In direct suggestions (‘I suggest...'), should is not generally used.

I suggest (that) you get... (not I-suggest that you should get.)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark19>>571    suppose, supposing and what if

Suppose, supposing and what if can all be used with present tenses to
make suggestions about things that might happen.

I haven't got a table cloth.* Suppose we use a sheet.

Let's go swimming. * Supposing there are sharks.

What if we invite your mother next weekend and go away the week after? A
past tense makes the suggestion sound less definite.

Daddy, can I watch TV?* Suppose you did your homework first I'm going to
climb up there. *No! supposing you slipped!

What if I came tomorrow instead of this afternoon?

In sentences about the past, past perfect tenses are used to talk about
situations that did not occur.

That was very clever* but supposing you had slipped?

For more about past tenses with present or future meanings, see 426.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark20>>572    supposed to

Be supposed + infinitive is used to say what people have to do (or not
do) according to the rules or the law_{f} or about what is (not)
expected to happen. Catholics are supposed to go to church on Sundays.

We're supposed to pay the Council Tax at the beginning of the month.
You're not supposed to park on double yellow lines.

There is often a suggestion that things do not happen as planned or
expected. This country is supposed to be a democracy Lucy was supposed
to come to lunch. What's happened?

Cats are supposed to be afraid of dogs, but ours isn't.

Questions with supposed to can suggest that there are problems.

The train's already left. What are we supposed to do now?

How am 1 supposed to finish all this work by ten o'clock?

That's a lovely picture, but what's it supposed to be?

Another use of supposed to is to say what is generally believed.

He's supposed to be quite rich, you know.

This stuff is supposed to kill flies. Let's try it Note the
pronunciation: /sa'paust ta/, not /sa*pauzd ta/.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark21>>573    surely

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark22>>1 not the same as certainly

Surely does not usually mean the same as certainly. We use certainly
when we simply tell people that something is true. We use surely mosdy
to ask for people's agreement: to persuade them that something must be
true, or that there are good reasons for believing it. Compare:

-    House prices are certainly rising fast at the moment (T know this
is so.*) House prices will surely stop rising soon. (‘I believe this
must be so.^{1})

-    I certainly posted the letter on Monday. (‘I know.*)

She's surely got the letter by now. (‘It seems very probable.')    ►

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark23>>2 belief in spite of ...

Surely can be used when we say that we think something is true in spite
of reasons to believe the opposite, or in spite of suggestions to the
contrary. These sentences are often like questions.

Vm going to marry Sonia,* Surety she's married already?

Surely thafs Henry over there? I thought he was in Scotland Is it
tonight we're going out?*No, tomorrow, surely?

With not, surely can express difficulty in believing something.

Tim failed his exam. ~ Oh, surety not?

Surety you*re not going out in that hat?

You don't think Tm going to pay for you, surety?

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark24>>574    sympathetic

Sympathetic usually means ‘sharing somebody's feelings' or ‘sorry for
somebody who is in trouble'.

Vm sympathetic towards the strikers.

She's always very sympathetic when people feel ill Sympathetic is a
‘false friend' for speakers of certain languages. It does not usually
mean the same as, for example, sympathique, sympathised sympatisk or
simpatico.

The people in my class are all very nice t pleasant t easy to get on
with, (not ... are all very sympathetic.)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark25>>575    taboo words and swearwords

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark26>>1 introduction

Many languages have words which are considered dangerous, holy, magic or
shocking, and which are only used in certain situations or by certain
people. For instance, in some African tribes the names of dead chiefs
must not be said; in many cultures, words associated with religious
beliefs are used only on religious occasions, or only by priests. Words
of this kind can be called ‘taboo words'.

English has three main groups of taboo words and expressions:

a A number of words connected with the Christian religion (e.g. the
names Christ, God) are considered holy by some people. These people
prefer to use such words only in formal and respectful contexts, and
they may be upset or shocked by their ‘careless' use.

b Certain words relating to sexual activity and the associated parts of
the body {e.g. fuck, balls) are regarded as shocking by many people.
Thirty or forty years ago some of these words could not be printed or
broadcast, and they are still comparatively unusual in public speech and
writing. In polite or formal language these words are generally avoided,
or replaced by other words and expressions (e.g. make love ox have
sexual intercourse, testicles).

c Some words referring to the elimination of bodily wastes (what one
does in the lavatory)! and the associated parts of the body, are also
regarded as ^{1} dirty' or shocking (e.g. piss, shit). They are often
replaced by more ‘polite' words and expressions with the same meaning
(e.g. urinate, defecate) or by substitutes (e.g. go to the lavatory,
wash one's hands).

Because taboo words are shocking, they are common in situations where
people want to express powerful emotions by using ‘strong^{1} language.
This is called ‘swearing'. When people swear, taboo words usually change
their meanings completely. For example, fuck off and piss off have
nothing to do with sex or urinating - they are simply violently rude
ways of saying 'go away'. The strength of the original taboo word is
borrowed for a different purpose.

Linguistic taboos in English-speaking countries are less strong than
they used to be. Most taboo words and swearwords shock less than they
did, say, twenty years ago. And increasingly, people are using informal
taboo words which are felt to be amusingly ‘naughty' rather than
shocking, such as bonk or shag instead of fuck, or willy instead of
prick (= penis).

None the less, students should be very careful about using taboo words
and swearwords. There are two reasons for this. First of all, it is not
easy to know the exact strength of these expressions in a foreign
language, or to know what kind of people are shocked by them, and in
what circumstances. One may easily say something that is meant as a
joke, but which seriously upsets the people one is talking to. And
secondly, using this sort of language generally indicates membership of
a group: one most often swears in the company of people one knows well,
who belong to one's own social circle, age group etc. (Children usually
avoid swearing in front of adults so as not to annoy or shock them, and
adults avoid swearing in front of children for similar reasons.) So a
foreigner who uses swearwords may give the impression of claiming
membership of a group that he or she does not belong to.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark27>>2 taboo words

The following are some of the most common English taboo words, with
explanations of their literal meanings where necessary. Their
approximate ‘strength' is shown by stars: one-star words like hell, damn
or blast (which are scarcely taboo in modem English) will not upset many
people, while a three-or four-star word may be very shocking if it is
used in the wrong situation. Note, however, that individual reactions to
particular words (and to swearing in general) vary enormously, and that
attitudes are changing rapidly (and generally becoming more tolerant of
this kind of language). So people of different ages and backgrounds are
likely to disagree a good deal about the strength of the words listed.

The words associated with religion are not considered shocking when used
with their literal meaning, and the stars show their strength when used
as swearwords. The strength of the other words is mostly the same
whether they are used literally or for swearing.    »>

Religion taboo word

damn *

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

meaning

condemn to hell (rare in literal sense; mainly used as swearword)

strike with divine punishment (rare in literal sense; mainly used as
swearword)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

blast * (BrE) hell *

(.Damn, blast and hell have lost most of their strength, and are
scarcely regarded as swearwords by most people in modem English.)

God*

Jesus **

Christ **

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark28>>Parts of the body taboo word ♦ ♦ ♦

arse

(AmE ass **) arsehole ***

(AmE asshole **) balls ***

bollocks *** (BrE) cock *** dick*** prick*** tits cunt

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

***

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

****

»*«

twat

Sexual activity taboo word fuck *** wank ***

(AmE jerk off ***

bugger *** (BrE)

come ** sod ** (BrE)

bitch *** whore ** bastard **

Lavatory taboo word piss *** shit *** crap ** fart**

meaning

bottom, buttocks, anus

anus

testicles

testicles

penis

penis

penis

breasts

woman's sex organs woman's sex organs (rare)

meaning have sex (with)

masturbate (have sex with oneself)

have anal intercourse with a person or animal; person who does so (rare
in literal sense) reach a sexual climax (orgasm) homosexual
(abbreviation of sodomite, rare in literal sense)

female dog; earlier used for 'immoral' woman prostitute

child of unmarried parents

meaning

urine; urinate

excrement; defecate

excrement; defecate

let digestive gas out from the anus

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark29>>3 swearwords

All of the words listed above, and a few others, are used in swearing.
The meaning of a swearword is always different from its literal (taboo)
meaning (see introduction above). Compare:

What are you doing fucking in my bed?

(= Why are you making love in my bed? - literal meaning of /ticking)
What are you fucking doing in my bed?

(= Why the hell are you in my bed? - flicking used as a swearword)

The meaning of a swearword can also change with its grammatical form.
For instance, piss off is an aggressive way of saying go away, pissed is
British slang for drunk] pissed off is British slang for fed up. Many
swearwords are grammatically very flexible. Fucking, for example, can
act both as an adjective (e.g. Jucking idiot) and as an intensifying
adverb (e.g. fucking good, fucking soon, it's Jucking raining, fucking
well shut up). It is even sometimes put into the middle of another word
(<abso-fucking-lutely). Swearwords are the only words in the language
that have this grammatical range.

The following list shows some of the most common expressions used in
swearing; they are grouped accoi

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

rding to meaning.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

a exclamation of annoyance

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

(My) God!    Bugger (it)! (BrE)

Jesus!    Sod (it)! (BrE)

Christ!    Shit!

Jesus Christ!    Fuck (it)!

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Damn (it)!

Blast (it)! (BrE)

God damn it!

God damn! (especially AmE)

HelU

Examples of use:

Damn it! Can't you hurry up?

ChristI Its raining again!

Oh, fuck! Vve lost the address!

b exclamation of surprise

(My) God!

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Well, I'll be damned!

Son of a bitch! (especially AmE) Damn me!

Bugger/Fuck me! (BrE)

Well, Vm damned! buggered! (BrE)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Jesus!

Christ!

Jesus Christ!

God damn! (especially AmE)

Examples of use:

My God! Look at that!

Well, Vm damned! What are you doing here?

Bugger me! There's Mrs Smith. I thought she was on holiday

c surprised question

Who!What! Why etc the hell...? (AmE also ... in hell...?)

Who/ What/ Why etc the fuck...?

Examples of use:

What the hell do you think you're doing?

Where the fuck are the car keys?    >

Note that these nouns generally have no real meaning. They simply
express a strong emotion such as hatred, anger, envy or contempt.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

bastard

fart

prick

fucker

cunt

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

shit

sod (BrE) bugger (BrE) wanker (BrE) twat (= idiot)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Examples of use: You bastard! Stupid old fart! He's a real prick! Stupid
fucker!

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

bitch (applied to women) _{( id)} \^ _{k} *on of a bitch (An*)

arsehole (AmE asshole) _{dickhead} _{(= id}i_{ot)} motherfucker (AmE)
cocksucker (AmE)

Lucky sod!

She's such a bitch!

That guy's a real asshole!

Stupid twat!

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

insult (imperative verb + object)

Damn .../    Blast.../ (BrE)

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Sod.../ (BrE) Screw.../

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

Bugger...! (BrE)    Fuck.../

Examples of use:

Damn that child!

Fuck you! Screw the government!

insuiting request to go away

Fuck off!    Bugger off! (BrE)

Piss off!    Sod off! (BrE)

Examples of use:

Can I have a word with you?*Fuck off!

If Andy comes asking for money, tell him to piss off

expression of unconcern (= 'I don't care')

I don'tfcouldn't give a damn/shit/fuck;... a bugger (BrE).

Examples of use:

They can come and arrest me if they want to. I don't give a fuck. Mary's
very angry with you. *1 don't give a bugger.

violent refusal/rejection/defiance

(I'll be) damned/fucked if I will! ... buggered if I will! (BrE) Stuff
it (up your arse/ass)

Get stuffed! (BrE)

Balls!

Balls to .../ (BrE)

Bollocks! (BrE)

Kiss my arsefass!

Suck my cock!

Why don't you take a flying fuck?

Examples of use:

Mr Parsons wants you to clean out the lavatories. * Fucked if I will!
Management are offering another £8 a week * They can stuff it. Give me a
kiss. * Get stuffed!

You're afraid to fight.* Balls!

Balls to the lot of you! Tm going home.

damn(ed)    sodding (BrE)

bloody (BrE)    fucking

goddam (AmE)

Bloody has no literal taboo equivalent in modem English.

Examples of use:

That car's going damn(ed) fast She's a fucking marvellous singer.
Where's the bloody switch?    Put the jucking cat out!

It's bloody raining again.

When these words are used before verbs, the word well is often added in
British English.

I damn well hope you never come back Tm not Jucking well paying this
time.

It's bloody well raining again.

miscellaneous

Fuck (up), screw (up) and bugger (up) (BrE) can mean 'ruin', 'spoil^{1}
or ‘destroy'.

Somebody's fucked up the TV You've buggered my watch.

Fucked and buggered can mean ‘exhausted^{1} (BrE).

Want another game of tennis? ~ No, I'm fucked Screw (especially AmE) can
mean ‘cheat^{1}.

Don't buy a car from that garage - they'll screw you.

Cock up (BrE), balls up (BrE), fuck up and screw up can be used as verbs
or nouns to refer to mistakes of organisation. (When used as nouns, they
are often written with hyphens.)

That bloody secretary's cocked up my travel arrangements.

Sorry you didn't get your invitation - Mary made a balls-up.

The conference was a complete juck-up.

Well we really screwed up this time, didn't we?

Balls (BrE), bullshit (AmE), cock and crap are used to mean ‘nonsense'.
What's his new book like? ~ A load of balls.

Don't talk crap!

In American English, shit can mean ‘lies* or ‘nothing'.

Janie's getting married ~No shit?

He don't know his ass from a hole in the ground He don't know shit
Bugger!fuck!damn/sod all are used in British English to mean ‘nothing'.

There's fuck all in the fridge. We'll have to eat out.

In British English, pissed means ‘drunk^{1} and pissed off means ‘fed
up'.

Steve was pissed out of his mind again last night I'm getting pissed off
with London.

In American English, pissed is ‘annoyed', ‘angry*.

I'm pissed at him because of what he's been saying about me.

A sod of a ... means ‘a very bad ..

It was a sod of an exam.    It's a sod of a place to get to.

For Information about slang, see 533.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark30>>576    take: time

We can use take to say how much time we need to do something. Five
structures are common

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark31>>1    The person is the subject:

person + take + time + infinitive

I took three hours to get home last night.

She takes all day to get out of the bathroom.

They took two hours to unload the ferry.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark32>>2    The activity is the subject:

activity + take (+ person) + time

The journey took me three hours.

Gardening takes a lot of time.

Unloading the ferry took them two hours.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark33>>3    The object of the activity is the
subject:

object of activity + take (+ person) + infinitive

The ferry took them two hours to unload This house will take all week to
clean.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark34>>4    Preparatory it is the subject:

It + take (+ person) + time + infinitive

It took me three hours to get home last night.

It takes ages to do the shopping.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark35>>5    Before/until is used:

It + take (+ person) + time + before/until.

It took us six weeks beforefuntil we got the house clean.

It took a long time before/until she felt comfortable in her new school.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark36>>577    taste

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark37>>1 link verb

Taste can be used as a ‘link verb* (see 328), followed by an adjective
or noun, to say how something tastes. Progressive forms are not used.

This tastes nice. What's in it? (not .. .-tastes nicely.)

The wine tastes funny, (not ... ts-tasting funny-...)

Before a noun, taste of and taste like are used.

The fish soup tasted mostly of garlic.

Her lips tasted like wild strawberries.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark38>>2    transitive verb: 'perceive'

Taste can be used with an object, to say what we perceive with our sense
of taste. Progressive forms are not used. We often use can taste (see
125).

I can taste onion and mint in the sauce, (not I am tasting...)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark39>>3    transitive verb: 'investigate'

Another transitive use is to say that we are using our sense of taste to
find out something. Progressive forms can be used.

Stop eating the cake. ~ Vm just tasting it to see if it's OK

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark40>>578 telephoning

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark41>>1    answering a phone

People answering a private phone either say ‘Hello* or give their name.
People answering a business phone most often give their name.

‘Hello‘Albert Packard.'

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark42>>2    asking for a person

Could I speak to Jane Horrabin? (AmE also Could I speak with .. .7)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark43>>3    saying who you are

Hello, this is Corinne. (not usually ... Vm Corinne.)

Could I speak to Jane Horrabin? ~ Speaking, or This is Jane Horrabin
(speaking).

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark44>>4    asking who somebody is

Who is that? (AmE Who is this I Who's there?)

Who am I speaking to? Who is that speaking?

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark45>>5    asking for a number

Can/Could I have extension two oh four six?

What's the (dialling) code for Bristol? (AmE ... area code .. .7)

How do I get an outside line?

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark46>>6    if you want the other person to pay for
the call

I'd like to make a reversed (or transferred) charge call to Bristol
437878. (AmE I'd like to make a collect call...)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark47>>7    if somebody is not there

I'm afraid she's not in at the moment.

Can I take a message?

Can I leave a message?

Please leave your message after the tone.

I'll ring/call again later. (AmE I'll call...)

Could you ask her to ring/call me back?

Could you ask her to ring/call me at/on Ardington 637022?

Could you just tell her Jake called?    ►

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark48>>8    asking people to wait

Just a moment.    Hold the line, please.

Hold on a moment, please. Hang on. (informal)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark49>>9    things a switchboard operator may say

One moment, please.    (The number's) ringing for you.

(Vm) trying to connect you. (Tm) putting you through now.

Tm afraid the number/line is engaged (BrE) / busy (AmE). Will you hold?
fm afraid there's no reply from this number f from her extension.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark50>>10    wrong number

I think you've got the wrong number, fm sorry. I've got the wrong
number.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark51>>11    problems

Could you speak louder? It's a bad line (BrE) I bad connection.

You're breaking up.

I'll call again.    I was/got cut off.

I rang/called you earlier but I couldn't get through.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark52>>579 telling the time

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark53>>1 saying what time it is

There are two common ways of saying what time it is.

8.05 eight (oh) Jive or five past eight

8.10 eight ten or ten past eight

8.15 eight fifteen or a quarter past eight

8.25 eight twenty-five or twenty-five past eight

8.30 eight thirty or half past eight

8.35 eight thirty-five or twenty-five to nine

8.45 eight forty-five or a quarter to nine

8.50 eight fifty or ten to nine

9.00 nine o'clock

Americans prefer to write a colon between the hours and the minutes:
8:50. People generally prefer to say minutes past/to for times between
the five-minute divisions.

seven minutes past eight (More natural than seven past eight) three
minutes to nine (More natural than three to nine)

The expression o'clock is only used at the hour. Compare:

Wake me at seven (o'clock).

Wake me at ten past seven, (not .. .-ten-past-seven oblock)

Past is often dropped from half past in Informal speech.

OK see you at half two. (=... half past two.)

In American English after is often used instead of past (e.g. ten after
six)\ but Americans do not say half after. And in American English of
before and till are possible instead of to (e.g. twenty-five of three).

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark54>>2    asking what time it is

Common ways of asking about time are:

What time is it? Have you got the time? (informal)

What's the time? Could you tell me the time? (more formal)

What time do you make it? (or What do you make the time?)

(BrE, meaning ‘What time is it by your watch?')

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark55>>3    the twenty-four hour clock

The twenty-four hour clock is used mainly in timetables, programmes and
official announcements. In ordinary speech, people usually use the
twelve-hour clock. Compare:

-    Last check-in time is 20.15.

We have to check in by a quarter past eight in the evening.

-    The next train from platform 5 is the 17.53 departure for Carlisle.

What time does the next train leave? ~ Five fifty-three.

-    The meeting will begin at fourteen hundred We're meeting at two
o'clock

If necessary, times can be distinguished by using in the
morning/afternoon/ evening. In a more formal style, we can use am (=
Latin ante meridiem -‘before midday^{1}) and pm (= post meridiem -
‘after midday').

09.00    = nine o'clock in the morning (or nine am)

21.00    = nine o'clock in the evening (or nine pm)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark56>>580 tense simplification in subordinate
clauses

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark57>>1    reasons for tense simplification

If the main verb of a sentence makes it clear what kind of time the
speaker is talking about, it is not always necessary for the same time
to be indicated again in subordinate clauses. Compare:

-    This discovery means that we will spend less on food.

This discovery wiU mean that we spend less on food.

-    It is unlikely that he will win.

I will pray that he wins.

Verbs in subordinate clauses are often simpler in form than verbs in
main clauses - for example present instead of future, simple past
instead of would + infinitive, simple past instead of past perfect.

You'll find Coca-Cola wherever you go. (not .. .-wherever you will go.)

He would never do anything that went against his conscience.

(More natural than ... that would go against his conscience.)

I hadn't understood what she said

(More natural than ... what she had said.)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark58>>2    present instead of future: /'// write
when I have time

Present tenses are often used instead of will + infinitive to refer to
the future in subordinate clauses. This happens not only after
conjunctions of time like when, until, after, before, as soon as, but in
most other subordinate clauses -

►

for instance after if, whether and on condition that, after question
words and relatives, and in indirect speech.

M write to her when I have time. (not ... when I will have time0 I'll
think of you when I'm lying on the beach next week, (not ... when I will
be lying...)

Will you stay here until the plane takes off?

It will be interesting to see whether he recognises you.

I'll have a good time whether I win or lose.

I'll lend it to you on condition that you bring it back tomorrow.

I'll go where you go.

He says he'll give five pounds to anybody who finds his pen.

One day the government will really ask people what they want If she asks
what I'm doing in her flat, I'll say I'm checking the gas.

I think you'll find the wind slows you down a bit This can happen even
if the main verb is not future in form, provided it refers to the
future.

Phone me when you arrive.

Make sure you come back soon.

You can tell who you like next week* but not until then.

In comparisons with as and than, present and future verbs are both
possible. She'll be on the same train as we are/will tomorrow.

We'll get there sooner than you dofwiH

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark59>>3    present perfect:... when I've finished

The present perfect is used instead of the future perfect, to express
the idea of completion.

I ll phone you when I've finished (not ... when I will have finished.)

At the end of the year there will be an exam on everything you've
studied. (not ... every thing you will have studied.)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark60>>4    future in subordinate clauses:... where
she will be

A future verb is necessary for future reference in a subordinate clause
if the main verb does not refer to the future (or to the same time in
the future).

I don't know where she will be tomorrow:

I'm sure I won't understand a word of the lecture.

I'll hide it somewhere where he'll never find it (two different future
times) If she rings, I'll tell her that I'll ring back later, (two
different future times)

For future verbs In if* clauses (e.g. 1*11 give you £100 if it will help
you to go on holiday), see 260.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark61>>5    in case, I hope, I bet; it doesn't
matter etc

A present tense is normally used with a future meaning after in case
even if the main verb is present or past. For details, see 271.

I've got my tennis things in case we have time for a game tomorrow.

In an informal style, present verbs are often used with future meanings
after I hope (see 250) and I bet (see 103).

I hope you sleep well

I bet he gets married before the end of the year.

Present tenses are also used with future reference after it doesn't
matter, I don't care, I don't mind, ifs not important and similar
expressions.

It doesn't matter where we go on holiday.

I don't care what we have for dinner if I don't have to cook it.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark62>>6    past instead of would...

Would, like will, is avoided in subordinate clauses; instead, we
generally use past verbs. This happens in j/-clauses (see 258), and also
after most other conjunctions.

If I had lots of money, I would give some to anybody who asked for it.

(not If I would have-.. . u/ho-would ask for it.)

Would you follow me wherever I went? (not ... wherever-! would go?)

In a perfect world, you would be able to say exactly what you thought.

(not ... what you would think)

I would always try to help anybody who was in trouble, whether I knew
them or not.

For past tenses after It's time, see 306; for past tenses after Vd
rather, see 491; for past tenses after / wish, see 630.

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark63>>7    simplification of perfect and
progressive verbs

Simple past verb forms are used quite often in subordinate clauses
instead of present perfect and past perfect tenses, if the meaning is
clear.

It's been a good time while it('s) lasted I've usually liked the people
l('ve) worked with.

For thirty years, he had done no more than he (had) needed to.

He probably crashed because he had gone to sleep while he was driving.
(More natural than ... while he had been driving.)

Progressives are often replaced by simple forms in subordinate clauses.

He's working. But at the same time as he works, he's exercising.

(or ... at the same time as he's working...)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark64>>8    exceptions

These rules do not usually apply to clauses beginning because, although,
since or as (meaning ‘because*), or to non-identifying relative clauses
(see 495).

I won't mind the heat on holiday because I won't move about much.

I'll come to the opera with you, although I probably won't enjoy it.

You'll work with Mr Harris, who will explain everything to you.

For tenses in indirect speech, see 275.

581 than and as

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark65>>as subjects, objects and complements

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark66>>1 subjects: more than is necessary, as
happened

Than and as can replace subjects in clauses (rather like relative
pronouns). He worries more than is necessary, (not ... ■
more-than-hfwhat-is-necessary:) There were a lot of people at the
exhibition - more than came last year. (not ... more than they came last
year;)

The train might be late, as happened yesterday, (not ...-as-h-happened
yesterday.)    ►

We've got food for as many people as want it. (not ... as they want it)
Common expressions with as in place of a subject: as follows; as was
expected; as was agreed]; as is well known

I have prepared a new plan, as follows, (not ... as it follows:)

They lost money, as was expected (not ... as it was expected.)

I am sending you the bill, as was agreed (not ... as it was agreed)

As is well known, smoking is dangerous, (not As tt-is-well known ...)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark67>>2 objects and complements: as I did last
year

Than and as can also act as objects and complements.

They sent more vegetables than I had ordered (not ...
than-hhad-ordered-therm)

Don't lose your passport, as I did last year. (not ... as I did it last
year.) She was more frightened than I was. (not ... than I was it.)

You're as tired as I am. (not ... as J am it.)

Some English dialects use what after as and than in these cases.

They sent more paper than what I had ordered, (non-standard)

You're as tired as what I am. (non-standard)

<<main-37.xhtml#bookmark68>>582    thankful and grateful

Grateful is the normal word for people's reactions to kindness, favours
etc. I'm very grateful for all your help, (not I'm very thankful...)

She wasn't a bit grateful to me for repairing her car.

Thankful is used especially for feelings of relief at having avoided a
danger, or at having come through an unpleasant experience.

I'm thankful that we got home before the storm started We feel very
thankful that she didn't marry him after all Well I'm thankful that's
over.

<<main-38.xhtml>>

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark0>>583    that-clauses

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark1>>1    that as a connector

That is a conjunction with litde real meaning. It is simply a connector
- it shows that a clause forms part of a larger sentence. Compare:

I understood. He was innocent, (two separate sentences)

I understood that he was innocent. (The clause he was innocent has
become the object of the verb in the larger sentence.)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark2>>2    f/iaf-dauses in sentences

A r/wzr-clause can be the subject of a sentence.

That she should forget me so quickly was rather a shock It can be a
complement after be.

The main thing is that you're happy.

Many verbs can have that-clauses as objects.

We knew that the next day would be difficult.

I regretted that I was not going to be at the meeting.

And many nouns and adjectives can be followed by r/zar-clauses.

I admire your belief that you are always right.

The Minister is anxious that nothing should get into the papers.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark3>>3    the fact that...

It is unusual for that-clauses to stand alone as subjects. They are more
often introduced by the expression the fact

The fact that she was foreign made it difficult for her to get a job.

(not That she was foreign made it difficult-...)

The fact that Simon had disappeared didn't seem to worry anybody.

(More natural than That Simon had disappeared didn't...)

The fact also introduces f/uzf-clauses after prepositions (that-clauses
cannot follow prepositions directly).

The judge paid no attention to the fact that she had just lost her
husband.

(not .. .-paid-no-attention tothat-she-hadjust-...)

He held her completely responsible far the fact that she took food
without paying for it (not ... responsible for that she took...)

In spite of the fact that she had three small children, he sent her to
prison for six months, (not In-spke-of that she had...)

For cases when prepositions are dropped before that-clauses, see 453.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark4>>4    preparatory it

It is often used as a preparatory subject or object for a that-clause
(see 446-447).

It surprised me that he was stiU in bed.

(More natural than That he was still in bed surprised me.)

She made it clear that she was not interested, (not She made that she
was not interesteddear.)

For reasons why ffcar-riauses are often moved to the ends of sentences,
see 512.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark5>>5    t/iat-dauses after verbs, nouns and
adjectives

Some verbs, nouns or adjectives can be followed by that-clauses; some
cannot. Compare:

-    / hope that you'll have a wonderful time.

I want you to have a wonderful time, (not I-want-that you'll have-...)

-    I understood his wish that we should be there.

I understood the importance of our being there, (not ... the importance
that we should be there.)

-    It's essential that you visit the art museum.

It's worth your visiting the art museum. (not It's worth-that you
visit-...) Unfortunately there is no easy way to decide which nouns,
verbs or adjectives can be followed by r/utt-clauses. It is best to
check in a good dictionary.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark6>>6    verbs in t/iat-dauses

In some kinds of r/uz?-clause, should + infinitive or subjunctives are
often used instead of ordinary verb forms. For details, see 521, 567.

I insisted that she should see the doctor at once. (or ... that she
see...) *

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark7>>7 compound conjunctions

Some conjunctions are made up of two or more words, including that.
Common examples: so that, in order that, provided that, providing that,
seeing that, given that, now that.

/ gof here ear/y so f/iaf u/e could have a few minutes alone together.

M come with you providing that Bill doesn't mind OK, YU help you, seeing
that you asked so nicely.

Gii/en f/iaf Monday is a holiday, we could go to Scotland for the
weekend. Now that the kids are at school, the house seems very quiet

For that-clauses after reporting verbs (‘indirect speech'), see 274-275.

For the relative pronoun that, see 494.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark8>>584 that: omission

We can often leave out the conjunction that, especially in an informal
style.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark9>>1    indirect speech: He said (that) ...

That can be left out informally after many common reporting verbs.

James said (that) he was feeling better.

I thought (that) you were in Ireland

The waiter suggested (that) we should go home.

That cannot be dropped after certain verbs, especially intransitive
verbs - e.g. reply, email, shout

James replied that he was feeling better. (not James replied he was-...)

She shouted that she was busy. (not She shouted she was busy.)

For sentences like Who do you think is outside? see 486.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark10>>2    after adjectives: I'm glad you're all
right

We can leave out that in clauses after some common adjectives.

Ym glad (that) you're all right

Ifs funny (that) he hasn't written. We were surprised (that) she came.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark11>>3    not dropped after nouns

That is not usually dropped after nouns.

I did not believe his claim that he was ilL (More natural than ...his
claim he was ill)

He disagreed with Copernicus* view that the earth went round the sun.
(not ... Copernicus' view the-earth-went...)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark12>>4    conjunctions

That can be left out in an informal style in some common two-word
conjunctions, such as so that, such... that, now that, providing that\
provided that, supposing that, considering that, assuming that.

Come in quietly so (that) she doesn't hear you,

I was having such a nice time (that) I didn't want to leave.

The garden looks nice now (that) we've got some flowers out.

You can borrow it provided (that) you bring it back tomorrow.

Assuming (that) nobody gets lost, we'll all meet again here at six
o'clock

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark13>>5 relative structures

We can usually leave out the relative pronoun that when it is the object
in a relative clause (see 495).

Look! There are the people (that) we met in Brighton.

Do it the way (that) I showed you.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark14>>585    the matter (with)

We use the matter (with) after something, anything, nothing and what It
means ‘wrong (with)'.

Something's the matter with my foot Is anything the matter?

Nothing's the matter with the car - you're just a bad driver.

What's the matter with Frank today?

There is often used as a ‘preparatory subject' (see 587).

There's something the matter with the TV.

Is there anything the matter?

For no matter what etc, see 378

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark15>>586    there

The spelling there is used for two words with completely different
pronunciations and uses.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark16>>1    adverb of place

There (pronounced /6ea(r)/) is an adverb meaning ‘in that place*.

What's that green thing over there?

There's the book I was looking for.

For the difference between here and there, see 245.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark17>>2    introductory subject

There (most often pronounced /Oa(r)/) is used as an introductory subject
in sentences beginning there is, there are, there might be etc. For
details, see 587. There's a book under the piano.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark18>>587    there is

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark19>>1 use

In sentences which say that something exists (or does not exist)
somewhere, we usually use there as a kind of preparatory subject, and
put the real subject after the verb. Note the pronunciation of there,
usually /6e(r)/, not /6ea(r)/. There's a hole in my tights. (More
natural than A hole is in my tights.) There's ice on the lake. (More
natural than Ice is on the lake.)

It cannot be used in this way.

There is a lot of noise in the street (not It is a lot of noise in the
street) There are is used with plural subjects.    ►

I don't know how many people there are in the waiting room, (not ... how
many people there is...)

However, there's can begin sentences with plural subjects in informal
speech. There's two policemen at the door, Dad.

There's some grapes in the fridge, if you're still hungry.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark20>>2    indefinite subjects

We use there in this way particularly with subjects that have indefinite
articles, no article, or indefinite determiners like some, any, no; and
with indefinite pronouns like somebody, nothing.

There are some people outside.

There were no footsteps to be seen. Is there anybody at home?

There was dancing in the streets.    There's something worrying me.

Note the use of wrong and the matter (see 585).

There's something wrong    Is there anything the matter?

Note also the structures with sense, point, use (see 57) and need.

There's no sense in making him angry.

Is there any point in talking about it again?

Do you think there's any use trying to explain?

There's no need to hurry - we've got plenty of time.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark21>>3    all tenses

There can be used in this way with all tenses of be.

Once upon a time there were three wicked brothers.

There has never been anybody like you.

There will be snow on high ground And there can be used in question tags
(see 488.4).

There'll be enough for everybody, won't there?

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark22>>4    structures with auxiliary be

There can also be used in structures where be is a progressive or
passive auxiliary. Note the word order.

There was a girl water-skiing on the lake. (= A girl was water-skiing
...)

(not There was-waterskiing a girl...)

There have been more Americans killed in road accidents than in all the
wars since 1900. (= More Americans have been killed ...)

(not There have been killed-more-Amertcans...)

There'll be somebody meeting you at the airport.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark23>>5    more complex structures

There can be used with modal verb + be, and with some other verbs (e.g.
seem, appear, happen, tend) before to be.

There might be drinks if you wait for a bit There must be somebody at
home - ring again.

If the police hadn't closed the road there could have been a bad
accident. There seem to be some problems. (not There seems to be...)

Could you be quiet? There happens to be a lecture going on.

There tends to be jealousy when a new little brother or sister comes
along. Note also the structure there is certain!sure! likely!bound to
be.

There is sure to be trouble when she gets his letter.

Do you think there's likely to be snow?

Infinitives (there to be) and -ing forms (there being) are also used.

I don't want there to be any more trouble.

What's the chance of there being an election this year?

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark24>>6    other verbs

In a formal or literary style, some other verbs can be used with there
besides be. These are mostly verbs which refer to states or arrivals.

In a small town in Germany there once lived a poor shoemaker There
remains nothing more to be done.

Suddenly there entered a strange figure dressed all in black There
followed an uncomfortable silence.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark25>>7    definite subjects

There is not normally used in a sentence with a definite subject (e.g. a
noun with a definite article, or a proper name).

The door was open, (not There was the door open.)

James was at the party, (not There was James at the party.)

One exception to this is when we simply name people or things, in order
to draw attention to a possible solution to a problem.

Who could we ask? ~ Well, there's James, or Miranda, or Ann, or Sue, ...
Where can he sleep? ~ Well, there's always the attic.

Another apparent exception is in stories that begin There was this
..when this has an indefinite sense.

There was this man, see, and he couldn't get up in the mornings. So
he...

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark26>>588 think

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark27>>1    'have an opinion': not progressive

When think is used for opinions, progressive forms are unusual.

I don't think much of his latest book (not I'm not thinking much...)

Who do you think will win the election? (not Who are you thinking...?)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark28>>2    other meanings: progressive possible

When think has other meanings (e.g. consider or plan) progressives are
possible.

You're looking worried. What are you thinking about? (not ... What do
you thmk-about?)

I'm thinking of changing my job.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark29>>3    -ing forms

After think, -ing forms can be used, but infinitives are not usually
possible unless there is an object (see paragraph 4 below).

She's thinking of going to university next year, (not She's thinking to
go...) However, think + infinitive can be used when we talk about
remembering to do something, or having the good sense to do something.

Did you think to close the windows when it started raining?    ►

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark30>>4    think + object (+ to be) + complement

In a very formal style, think is sometimes followed by an object and an
adjective or noun complement.

They thought her fascinating. We thought him a fool.

It can be used as a preparatory object (see 442) for an infinitive or
clause.

I thought it better to pretend that I knew nothing We thought it
important that she should go home.

To be is occasionally used before the complement (suggesting objective
judgement rather than subjective impression), but this is very unusual.

They thought him to be a spy.

In more normal styles, ffazf-clauses are preferred after think.

They thought that she was fascinating.

We thought that he was a fool However, the passive equivalent of the
object + complement structure is reasonably common, usually with to be.

He was thought to be a spy.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark31>>5    transferred negation: / don't think...

When think is used to introduce a negative clause, we most often put nor
with think, rather than with the following clause (see 369).

I don't think it will rain. (More natural than I think it won't rain.)

Mary doesn't think she can come.

However, we can express surprise with I thought... not.

Hello! I thought you weren't coming!

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark32>>6    indirect speech

Think does not usually introduce indirect questions.

I was wondering if I could do anything to help.

(More natural than I was thinking if...)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark33>>7    I thought...

Note the use of stressed I thought... to suggest that the speaker was
right. Compare:

It isn't very nice. ~ Oh, dear. I thought you'd like it. (But I was
wrong.)

It's beautiful! ~ Oh, I am glad. I THOUGHT you'd like it (And I was
right)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark34>>8    I had thought.... I should think etc

Past perfect forms can suggest that the speaker was mistaken, especially
when had is stressed.

I had thought that we were going to be invited to dinner.

I should think and I should have thought (also I would / I'd...) can
introduce guesses.

I should think we'll need at least twelve bottles of wine.

I should (I would / I'd) have thought we could expect at least forty
people. This structure can also introduce criticisms.

I should have thought he could have washed his hands, at least.

For I (don't) think so and I thought so, see 539.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark35>>589 this and that

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    people and things

This! that! these! those can be used as determiners with nouns that
refer to either people or things.

this child that house But when they are used as pronouns without nouns,
this! that! these! those normally only refer to things

This costs more than that, (but not This says he's tired.)

Put those down - they're dirty. (but not Tell those to go away.)

However, this etc can be used as pronouns when we say who people are.
Hello. This is Elisabeth. Is that Ruth? That looks like Mrs Walker.
Who's that?    These are the Smiths.

Note also Those who... (see paragraph 6 below).

For a similar use of it to refer to people, see 428.9.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    the difference

We use this I these for people and things which are close to the
speaker.

This is very nice - can I have some more?

Get this cat off my shoulder.

I don't know what I'm doing in this country. (not ,.. in that country.)

Do you like these ear-rings? Bob gave them to me.

We use that! those for people and things which are more distant from the
speaker, or not present.

That smells nice - is it for lunch?

Get that cat off the piano.

All the time I was in that country I hated it.

I like those ear-rings. Where did you get them?

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark38>>3    time

This! these can refer to situations and events which are going on or
just about to start.

I like this music. What is it?

Listen to this. You'll like it (not Listen to that...)

Watch this. This is a police message.

That! those can refer to situations and events which have just finished,
or which are more distant in the past.

That was nice. What was it? (not This was nice ...)

Did you see that? Who said that?

Have you ever heard from that Scottish boy you used to go out with?

(not ... this Scottish boy you used to go-out-with.)

That can show that something has come to an end.

... and that's how it happened

Anything else? No, that's all_{t} thanks, (in a shop)

OK. That's it I'm leaving. It was nice knowing you.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark39>>4    acceptance and rejection

We sometimes use this! these to show acceptance or interest, and that!
those to show dislike or rejection. Compare:    ►

Now tell me about this new boyfriend of yours.

I don't like that new boyfriend of yours.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark40>>5    on the telephone

On the telephone, British people use this to identify themselves, and
that to ask about the hearer's identity.

Hello. This is Elisabeth. Is that Ruth?

Americans can also use this to ask about the hearer's identity.

Who is this?

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark41>>6    that, those meaning 'the one(s)'

In a formal style, that and those can be used with a following
description to mean ‘the one(s)\ Those who... means ‘the people who ..

A dog's intelligence is much greater than that of a cat.

Those who can, do. Those who can't, teach.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark42>>7    this and that meaning 'so'

In an informal style, this and that are often used with adjectives and
adverbs in the same way as so*

I didn't realise it was going to be this hot.

If your boyfriend's that clever, why isn't he rich?

In standard English, only so is used before a following clause.

It was so cold that I couldn't feel my fingers, (not It was that cold
that...) Not all that can be used to mean ‘not very*.

How was the play?~ Not all that good

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark43>>8    other uses

Note the special use of this (with no demonstrative meaning) in
conversational story-telling.

There was this travelling salesman, you see. And he wanted ...

That! those can suggest that an experience is familiar to everybody.

I can't stand that perfume of hers.

This use is common in advertisements.

When you get that empty feeling - break for a biscuit.

Earn more money during those long winter evenings. Telephone...

The differences between this and that are similar to the differences
between here and there (see 245), come and go (see 134) and bring and
take (see 112).

For this one, that one etc, see 395.

For these find those with singular kind of, sort of see 551.

For that which, see 498.19.

590 this/that and it:

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark44>>things that have just been mentioned

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark45>>1 referring back

This, that and it can all be used to refer back to things or situations
that have just been talked or written about. It does not give any
special emphasis.

So she decided to paint her house pink. It upset the neighbours a bit.

This and that are more emphatic; they ‘shine a light', so to speak, on
the things or situations, suggesting ‘an interesting new fact has been
mentioned'.

So she decided to paint her house pink, This/That really upset the
neighbours, as you can imagine.

This is preferred when there is more to say about the new subject of
discussion.

So she decided to paint her house pink This upset the neighbours so much
that they took her to court, believe it or not. The case came up last
week... Then in 1917 he met Andrew Lewis. This was a turning point in
his career: the two men entered into a partnership which lasted until
1946, and... (More natural than ... That was a turning point...)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark46>>2    more than one thing

When more than one thing has been mentioned, it generally refers to the
main subject of discussion; this and that generally refer to a new
subject that has been introduced (often the last thing mentioned).
Compare:

-    We keep the ice-cream machine in the spare room. It is mainly used
by the

children, incidentally. (The machine is used by the children.)

We keep the ice-cream machine in the spare room. This/That is mainly
used by the children, incidentally. (The spare room is used by the
children.)

-    I was carrying the computer to my office when I dropped it on the
kitchen

table. It was badly damaged. (The computer was damaged.)

I was carrying the computer to my office when I dropped it on the
kitchen table. This was badly damaged. (The table was damaged.)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark47>>3    focus

It is only used to refer to things which are ‘in focus* - which have
already been talked about. This is preferred when we ‘bring things into
focus* before anything has been said about them. Compare:

I enjoyed Vampires' PicnicIt/This is a film for all the family...
vampires' PICNIC: This is a film for all the family...

(not VAMPlRESr-PiCNtC: It is a film for all the family...)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark48>>4    referring forward

Only this can refer forward to something that has not yet been
mentioned. Now what do you think about this? I thought Yd get a job in
Spain for six months, and then ... (not Now what do you think-ab&ut
that/it...)

For more about this and that and the differences between them, see 589.

For more about it, see 428.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark49>>591 This is the first/last... etc

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark50>>1 This is the first time etc

We use the present perfect in sentences constructed with this/it/that is
the firsti secondfthirdlonlyfbest/worst etc.

This is the first time that Vve heard her sing, (not This is-the first
time that I hear her sing.)    ►

This is the fifth time you've asked me the same question (not This is
the fifth time-your-ask..)

That's the third cake you've eaten this morning.

It's one of the most interesting books Vve ever read.

Vm flying to New York tomorrow. IfU be the first time Vve travelled by
plane. When we talk about the past, we use the past perfect in these
structures.

It was the third time he had been in love that year, (not ... the third
time he was-in-bve-...)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark51>>2 tenses with This is the last... etc

Present (simple or progressive) and future tenses are both possible with
This is the last... and similar structures.

This is the last time I pay / Fm paying for you. (o r This is the last
time III pay for you.)

That's the last letter he gets / he's getting from me. (or That's the
last letter he'll get from me.)

This is the last thing I^{f}m going to say to you.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark52>>592    through: time

In American English, through can be used to mean 'up to and including*.

The park is open from May through September.

In British English, through is not normally used in this way. Instead,
British people say, for example, to ... inclusive_{f} or until the end
of...

The park is open from May to September inclusive, (or ... from May until
the end of September.)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark53>>593    time

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark54>>1 countability and article use

Time has various uses, some countable and some uncountable (for full
details see a good dictionary). Most of these are straightforward, but
there are problems in two areas:

a measure of duration: how long

When we talk about the number of hours, days etc that are needed to
complete something, time is generally uncountable (and therefore used
without a). How much time do we need to load the van?

It took quite some time to persuade her to talk to us.

Don't worry - there's plenty of time.

This is a complete waste of time However, time is countable in certain
expressions like a long/short time and quite a time.

I took a long time to get to sleep. She was away for quite a time.

The time can be used to mean 'enough time'; the is often dropped.

Just come with me-I haven't got (the) time to explain.

For the use of take with expressions of time, see 576.

When we talk about clock times, time is countable.

Six o'clock would be a good time to meet.

She phoned me at various times yesterday.

The is dropped in the expression it's time.

It's time to stop, (not It's the time ta stop.)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark55>>2    without preposition

Prepositions are often dropped before some common expressions with time.
He's busy. Why don't you come another time?

(More natural than ...at another time.)

What time does the match start?

(More natural than At what time...?)

You won't fool me this time In relative structures after time, that is
often used instead of when in an informal style (or dropped).

Do you remember the time (that) Freddy pretended to be a ghost?

You can come up and see me any time (that) you like.

The first time (that) I saw her, my heart stopped

For similar structures with other time words, and with place, way and
reason, see 498.6.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark56>>3    on time and in time

On time means 'at the planned time', ‘neither late nor early'. The
opposite is 'early' or 'late'. It is often used to refer to timetabled
events.

Only one of the last six trains has been on time, (not .. . in time:)

Peter wants the discussion to start exactly on time. (not .. . in-time:)

In time means ‘with enough time to spare", 'before the last moment^{1}.
The opposite is too late.

We arrived in time to get good seats. (not. .. on
time-to-get-good-seats.)

He would have died if they hadn't got him to hospital in time. (not ..
.-got him-to hospital on time.)

I nearly drove into the car in front, but I stopped just in time.

For structures after It's time, see 306.

For ways of telling the time, see 579.

For by the time, see 117.

For tenses with this is the first time..., this is the last time... and
similar structures, see 591.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark57>>594 tonight

Tonight refers to the present or coming night, not to the past night
(last night). Compare:

I had a terrible dream last night, (not I-had-a terrible dream tonight)

I hope I sleep better tonight.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark58>>595 too

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark59>>1    too and very

Too is different from very - too means 'more than enough', 'more than
necessary' or 'more than is wanted'. Compare:

-    He's a very intelligent child.

He's too intelligent far his class - he's not learning anything.

-    It was very cold, but we went out

It was too cold to go out, so we stayed at home.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark60>>2    too and too much

Before adjectives without nouns and before adverbs we use too, not too
much. You're too kind to me. (not You're too much kind to me.)

I arrived too early. (not I arriveeHoo-mttch-early.)

Too much is used, for example, before nouns. For details see 596.

I've got too much work.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark61>>3    modification: much too, far too etc

Expressions which modify comparatives (see 140) also modify too. much
too old (not very too old) a little too confident a lot too big    a bit
too soon

far too young    rather too often

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark62>>4    not used before adjective + noun

Too is not normally used before adjective + noun.

I put down the bag because it was too heavy, (not ... the-too heavy
bag.) She doesn't like men who are too tall (not She-deesn't like too
tall men.) Lets forget this problem - it's too difficult, (not ... this
too difficult problem.)

In a rather formal style, too can be used before adjective + a!an + noun
(see 14). Note the word order.

It's too cold a day for tennis.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark63>>5    too -. - + infinitive

We can use an infinitive structure after too + adjective/adverb.

He's too old to work. It's far too cold to go out We can also use an
infinitive structure after too muchlmany.

There was too much snow to go walking.

If the infinitive has its own subject, this is introduced by for (see
291).

It's too late for the pubs to be open.

There was too much snow for us to go walking.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark64>>6    too salty to drink, etc

The subject of a sentence with too can also be the object of a following
infinitive. (For more about this structure, see 284.4.) Object pronouns
are not normally used after the infinitive in this case.

The water is too salty to drink, (not The water is too salty to drink
it) However, object pronouns are possible in structures with for.

The water is too salty for us to drink (it).

Note the two possible meanings of sentences like He's too stupid to
teach:

1.    He's too stupid to be a teacher.

2.    He's too stupid for anyone to teach - he can't be taught

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark65>>7    That's really too kind of you

In informal speech too can sometimes be used to mean ‘very*.

Oh, that's really too kind of you - thank you so much.

I'm not feeling too well

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark66>>8    only too ...

The expression only too is used to mean 'very', ‘extremely*. It is
common in formal offers and invitations.

We shall be only too pleased if you can spend a few days with us

For too meaning ‘also', see 46.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark67>>596    too much and too many

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark68>>1    the difference

The difference between too much and too many is the same as the
difference between much and many (see 357). Too much is used with
singular (uncountable) nouns; too many is used with plurals.

You put too much salt in the soup.

I've had too many late nights recently. (not ... too much late
nights...)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark69>>2    a bit too much, rather too many, etc

Expressions which modify comparatives and too (see 140) can also modify
too much and too many.

She's wearing a bit too much make-up for my taste.

Vue been to rather too many parties recently.

However, much too many is unusual.

You ask far too many questions. (not .. -much too many questions:)

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark70>>3    too much/many without a noun

We can drop a noun after too muchlmany, if the meaning is clear.

You've eaten too much.

Did you get any answers to your advertisement? ~ Too many.

For the difference between too and too much, see 595.2.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark71>>597    travel, journey, trip and voyage

Travel means ‘travelling in general'. It is normally uncountable.

My interests are music and travel The plural travels is sometimes used;
it suggests a rather grand programme of travelling or exploration.    »>

He wrote a wonderful book about his travels in the Himalayas.

A journey is one 'piece' of travelling.

Did you have a good journey? (not Did you have a good travel?)

I met Jane on my last journey to England, (not .. . my-last travel)

A trip is a return journey together with the activity (business or
pleasure) which is the reason for the journey.

Vm going on a business trip next week. (= I'm going on a journey and I'm
going to do some business.)

Peter's school is organising a skiing trip to the Alps.

Compare:

How was your journey?~ The train broke down.

How was your trip?* Successful We do not so often use trip for
expeditions which have a very serious purpose, are very hard and/or take
a very long time.

In 1863 the President travelled to Dakota to make peace with the
Indians.

(not ... made a trip to Dakota to make-peace...)

Amundsen made his journey to the South Pole in 1911.

(not Amundsen made his trip to the-South Pole...)

A long sea journey is often called a voyage.

Note the preposition: on a journey I trip! voyage.

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark72>>598 turning verbs into nouns

<<main-38.xhtml#bookmark73>>1    using nouns for actions

It is very common to refer to an action by using a noun instead of a
verb. Nouns of this kind often have the same form as the related verbs.
The structure is especially common in an informal style.

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <div>
#+END_HTML

Just take a look at yourself Would you like a taste? What about a drink?

Come on - one more try!

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </div>
#+END_HTML

\\

There was a loud crash.

Did I hear a cough?

I need a wash.

Let's have a talk about your plans.

Let your sister have a go on the swing. (BrE)

<<main-39.xhtml>>

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    common structures

Nouns of this kind are often introduced by 'general-purpose* verbs such
as have, take, give, make, go for.

Ill have a think and let you know what I decide, (informal BrE)

I like to haveftake a bath before I go to bed If it won't start> let's
give it a push.

I don't know the answer, but Vm going to make a guess.

I try to go for a run every day.

We can use -ing forms in a similar way after do (see 160.3).

She does a bit of painting, but she doesn't like to show people.

These structures are very common when we talk about casual, unplanned or
unsystematic recreational activity. Compare:

Let's have a swim. (More natural than Let's swim.)

Do you do any sport?* Yes, I swim.

For details of ‘action-nouns' with have, and a list of common
expressions, see 236.

For give, see 226. For go Jbr, see 227. For go .. .ing, see 228.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark1>>599 two-part verbs (1): phrasal verbs

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark2>>1    verb + adverb particle: get back, walk
out

Many English verbs can be followed by small adverbs ('adverb
particles'). These two-part verbs are often called 'phrasal verbs'.

Get bock! She walked out. I switched the light off Common adverb
particles: about, across, ahead, along, (a)round, aside, away, back_{p}
by, down, forward, in, home, off, on, out, over, past, through, up.

Some of these words can also be used as prepositions. Compare:

I switched the light off (adverb particle)

I jumped off the wall (preposition)

For a detailed comparison, see 20.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark3>>2    idiomatic meanings: break out, turn up

The meaning of a two-word verb is often very different from the meanings
of the two parts taken separately.

War broke out in 1939. (Broke out is not the same as broke + out.)

Joe turned up last night. (= appeared - not the same as turned + up.)

I looked the word up in the dictionary. (Look up is not the same as look
+ up.)

We had to put off the meeting till Tuesday, tPut off is not the same as
put + off.)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark4>>3    phrasal verbs with and without objects

Some phrasal verbs are intransitive (they do not have objects).

1 got up at 7.00 today.    That colour really stands out.

Others are transitive.

Could you switch the light off? I helped Ann to fill in the form.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark5>>4    word order with objects

Adverb particles can go either before or after noun objects (unlike most
adverbs - see 21.1).

She switched off the light, or She switched the light off.

But they can only go after pronoun objects.

She switched it off. (not She switched off it.)

Is that the light which you switched off? (not ... the light off which
you switched?)

Give me back my watch, or Give me my watch back (not Gwe-baekrme~my
watch.)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark6>>5    verbs with prepositions and particles
together

A few verbs can be used with both an adverb particle and a preposition
(making them three-part verbs).

I get on with her quite well

Stop talking and get on with your work.

It's hard to put up with people who won't stop talking

If you're on the road on Saturday night, look out for drunk drivers.

I'll think about it and get back to you.

She went up to the policeman and explained her problem.    ►

I'm looking forward to the party.

For details of particular two-word verbs, see a good dictionary.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark7>>600    two-part verbs (2): prepositional
verbs

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark8>>1    verb + preposition: listen to; look at

Many English verbs are regularly followed by prepositions before
objects.

You never listen to me. (not You never listen me.)

Alan walked down the road without looking at anybody.

Prepositions are not used when there is no object.

Listen! (not Listen to!)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark9>>2    idiomatic meanings: look after, get over

The meaning of a two-word verb can be very different from the meanings
of the two parts taken separately.

Could you look after the kids while Fm out? (Look after is not the same
as look + after.)

It took him six months to get over his illness. (Get over is not the
same as get + over.)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark10>>3    word order: What are you thinking
about?

When an object comes at the beginning of a clause (e.g. in a question or
relative clause), a two-word verb usually stays together, so that a
preposition can be separated from its object and go at the end of the
clause. For details of this and other preposition-final structures, see
452.

What are you thinking about? (not About what are you thinking?)

Vve found the book which I was looking for (More natural in an informal
style than ...the book for which I was looking.)

For the difference between prepositions and adverb particles, see 20.

For prepositional verbs in the passive, see 416.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark11>>601    unless

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark12>>1    meaning

Unless has a similar meaning to if... not_{t} in the sense of ‘except
if.

Come tomorrow unless I phone. (= ... if I don't phone / except if I
phone.) I'll take the job unless the pay is too low. (= If the pay isn't
too low / except if the pay is too low.)

VII be back tomorrow unless there's a plane strike.

Lets have dinner out - unless you're too tired.

Vm going to dig the garden this afternoon, unless it rains.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    when unless cannot be used

Unless means 'except if. Unless is not used when the meaning is more
like 'because ... not'. Compare:

- OK. So we'll meet this evening at 7.00 - unless my train's late. (=
... except if my train's late.)

until 602

My wife will be angry if I'm not home by 7.00. (not My wife will be
angry unless I get home by 7.00. - She will be angry because Tm not
home.)

- I'll drive over and see you, unless the car breaks down. (=... except
if the car breaks down.)

I'll be surprised if the car doesn't break down soon (not IHl be
surprised unless the car breaks down soon. --- I'll be surprised because
it doesn't break down.)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark14>>3 tenses

In clauses with unless, we usually use present tenses to refer to the
future (see 580).

YU be in all day unless the office phones, (not ... unless the office-
wili phone:)

For more about sentences with if see 256-264.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark15>>602 until

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark16>>1    until and till

These two words can be used both as prepositions and conjunctions. They
mean exactly the same. TiU (AmE also *til) is informal.

OK, then, I won't expect you until/till midnight.

YU wait until/till I hear from you

The new timetable will remain in operation until June 30.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark17>>2    until/till and to

To can sometimes be used as a preposition of time with the same meaning
as untill till. This happens after from ...

I usually work from nine to five. (or ... from nine untiVtiU five.)

We can also use to when counting the time until a future event.

It's another three weeks to the holidays. (or ... until/tm the
holidays.)

In other cases, to is not generally used.

I waited for her until six o'clock, but she didn't come, (not / waited
for her to six o'clock...)

For AmE from ... through, see 592.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark18>>3    distance and quantity: until/till not
used

Until! till is used only to talk about time. To talk about distance, we
use to, as far as or up to; up to is also used to talk about quantity.

We walked as far as! up to the edge of the forest (not ..
.-tUhthe-edge...) The minibus can hold up to thirteen people, (not ...
until thirteen people.) You can earn up to £500 a week in this job.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark19>>4    tenses with until

Present tenses are used to refer to the future after until (see 580).

I'll wait until she gets here, (not ... until she will get here.)    ►

Present perfect and past perfect tenses can emphasise the idea of
completion. You're not going home until you've finished that report.

I waited until the rain had stopped.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark20>>5    structure with Not until...

In a literary style it is possible to begin a sentence with Not until...
, using inverted word order in the main clause (see 302).

Not until that evening was she able to recover her self-control

Not until I left home did I begin to understand how strange my family
was.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark21>>6    until and by: states and actions

We use until to talk about a situation or state that will continue up to
a certain moment. We use by (see 117) to say that an action or event
will happen at or before a future moment. Compare:

-    Can I stay until the weekend?

Yes, but you'll have to leave by Monday midday at the latest (= at
twelve on Monday or before.)

-    Can you repair my watch if I leave it until Saturday?

No, but we can do it by next Tuesday. (not ... until next Tuesday.)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark22>>7    until and before

Not until! till can mean the same as not before.

I won't be seeing Judy until/before Tuesday.

And both until and before can be used to say how far away a future event
is. It'll be ages until/before we meet again.

There's only six weeks left until/before Christmas.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark23>>603 up and down

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark24>>1    'towards/away from the centre'

Up and down are not only used to refer to higher and lower positions.
They can also refer to more or less important or central places. (Trains
to London used to be called 'up trains', and trains from London 'down
trains'.)

The ambassador walked slowly up the room towards the Queen's throne. She
ran down the passage, out of the front door and down the garden. We'll
be going down to the country for the weekend.

But in the US downtown refers to the central business/entertainment
area.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    north and south

People often use up and down for movements towards the north and south
(perhaps because north is at the top of a map page).

I work in London, but I have to travel up to Glasgow every few weeks.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark26>>3    'along'

Sometimes both up and down are used to mean ‘along', ‘further on', with
little or no difference of meaning.

The nearest post office is about half a mile up!down the road.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark27>>604 used + infinitive

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark28>>1 meaning

We use used + infinitive to talk about past habits and states which are
now finished.

I used to smoke, but now I've stopped, (not 1-was-used to smoke...)

That bingo hall used to be a cinema.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark29>>2    only past

Used to... has no present form (and no progressive, perfect, infinitive
or -ing forms). To talk about present habits and states, we usually just
use the simple present tense (see 462).

He smokes, (not He uses- to smoke.)

Her brother still collects stamps.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark30>>3    questions and negatives

When questions and negatives are written, they often have did... used
instead of did... use.

What did people use(d) to do in the evenings before TV?

I didn't use(d) to like opera, but now I do.

The contraction usedn't is also possible.

I usedn't to like opera.

But the most common negative is never used\_\_\_\_

I never used to like opera.

In a formal style, questions and negatives without do are possible, but
these are not very common.

I used not to like opera, but now I do. (or I used to not like opera
...) Used you to play football at school?

These forms are not used in tags.

You used not to like him, did you? (not ... used you?)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark31>>4    when used to ... is not used

Used to refers to things that happened at an earlier stage of one's life
and are now finished: there is an idea that circumstances have changed.
It is not used simply to say what happened at a past time, or how long
it took, or how many times it happened.

1 worked very hard last month, (not f-used-H>-work- very hard last
month.) I lived in Chester for three years, (not I used to live in
Chester for three

years.)

I went to France seven times last year, (not I used-to-go to France
seven-times ktst-year.)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark32>>5    word order

Mid-position adverbs (see 24) can go before or after used. The position
before used is more common in an informal style.

I always used to be afraid of dogs. (informal)

I used always to be afraid of dogs. (formal)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark33>>6    pronunciation

Note the pronunciation of used /ju:st/ and use /ju:s/ in this structure.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark34>>7    used + infinitive and be used to ...ing

Used + infinitive has a quite different meaning from be used to.. .ing
(see next section). Compare:

I didn't use to drive a big car. (= Once I didn't drive a big car, but
now I do.)

(not I wasn't used to drive-a-big-car.)

I wasn't used to driving a big car. (= Driving a big car was a new and
difficult experience -1 hadn't done it before.)

For the difference between used to and would, see 633.8.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark35>>605 [be] used to

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    meaning

If a person is used to something, it is familiar; he or she has
experienced it so much that it is no longer strange or new.

I've lived in Central London for six years now, so I'm used to the
noise.

At the beginning I couldn't understand Londoners because I wasn't used
to the accent.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    structures

Be used to can be followed by -ing forms, but not infinitives (see
298.2).

I'm used to driving in London now, but it was hard at the beginning.

(not I'm used to drive in-London ...)

It was a long time before she was used to working with old people.

Used is an adjective in this structure, and can be modified by quite or
very. I'm quite used to her little ways.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark38>>3    get used to .. -ing etc

Get, become and sometimes grow (see 128) can also be used before used to
C. .ing).

You'll soon get used to living in the country.

Little by little, he became used to his new family.

It took them a long time to grow used to getting up in the night.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark39>>4    pronunciation

Note that used is pronounced /ju:st/ in this structure.

606 verb complementation:

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark40>>what can follow a verb?

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark41>>1    different verbs, different structures

Different verbs can be followed by different kinds of word and
structure. This is partly a matter of meaning: after a verb like eat or
break, for instance, it is normal to expect a noun; after try or stop,
it is natural to expect a verb. It is also partly a matter of
grammatical rules that have nothing to do with meaning. Before an
object, wait is followed by for, expect has no preposition. One can tell
somebody something, but one cannot exptem-somebody somethmg. One hopes
to see somebody, but one looks forward to seeing somebody. One advises
somebody to see the doctor, but one does not suggest somebody to see-the
doctor. Unfortunately there are no simple rules for this kind of
problem; it is necessary to leam, for each verb, what kind of structures
can follow it. A good dictionary will normally give this information.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark42>>2    verb + object; transitive and
intransitive verbs

Some verbs are usually followed by nouns or pronouns that act as direct
objects. In grammars these verbs are called 'transitive'. Examples are
invite, surprise.

Lets invite Sally and Bruce, (but not Let's invite.)

You surprised me. (but not You surprised.)

Some verbs are not normally followed by direct objects. These are called
‘intransitive'. Examples are sit, sleep.

Do sit down, (but not Do sit that chair.)

I usually sleep well (but not Sheslepi-the baby.)

Many verbs can be both transitive and intransitive.

England lost the match. Let's eat.

England lost    I can't eat this.

Some transitive verbs can be followed by two objects (indirect and
direct). For details, see 610.

I'll send you the form tomorrow.

I'm going to buy Sarah some flowers.

For verb structures used as objects, see paragraphs 8-10 below.

For structures with object complements, see paragraph 10 below.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark43>>3    She opened the door / The door opened

Some verbs are used transitively and intransitively with different kinds
of subject; the intransitive use has a meaning rather like a passive
(see 412) or reflexive (see 493) verb. Compare:

- She opened the door. - The wind's moving the curtain.

The door opened.    The curtain's moving.

For more examples, see 609.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark44>>4    verbs with prepositions and particles

Many verbs need prepositions before their objects.

Why are you looking at me like that? (not Why are you looking me...?)
I'd like you to listen to this, (not .. .-to-listen this.)    ►

Let's talk about your plans. (not Let^{:}s-taik-your plans.)

The preposition is dropped when there is no object.

Look! (not Look at!)

Other verbs can be used with adverb particles (see 20). Some of these
combinations are transitive; others are intransitive.

Well have to put off our visit to Scotland. Its time to get up.

For more about two-part verbs like these, see 599-600.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark45>>5    complements of place

Usually, a preposition is necessary before an expression of place.

She arrived at the station last night, (not She arrived the-station ...)
Don't walk on the grass, (not Don'twalk the grass.)

A few verbs can be used with direct objects referring to place.

I like climbing mountains, (not /• like climbing on mountains.)

Some verbs are incomplete without an expression of place.

He lives in York, (but not He lives.)

She got off the bus. (but not She got)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark46>>6    link verbs

Some verbs are followed not by an object, but by a subject complement -
an expression which describes the subject. These are called ‘link
verbs^{1}. For details, see 328.

Your room is a mess.    That looks nice.

The toilets are upstairs. I felt a complete idiot.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark47>>7    verb + verb: auxiliaries

Many verbs can be followed by forms of other verbs. Auxiliary verbs are
used with other verbs to make questions and negatives, progressive
forms, perfect forms, and passives. For details, see 85.

Do you want some tea? Where have you been?

It doesn't matter.    These are made in France.

Modal auxiliary verbs are used with other verbs to add ideas such as
certainty, probability, futurity, permission and obligation. For
details, see 353-354.

You must be tired.    The lecture will start at ten.

The car may need a new engine. Can I borrow your paper?

We ought to invite the Maxwells this weekend

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark48>>8    verb + verb: other verbs

Many verbs besides auxiliaries can be followed by forms of other verbs
(or by structures including other verbs). This can happen, for example,
if we talk about our attitude to an action: the first verb describes the
attitude and the second refers to the action. The second verb structure
is often rather like the direct object of the first verb.

I enjoy playing cards.

I saw that she was crying. I hope to see you soon.

Different structures are possible, depending on the particular verb.
Some verbs can be followed by infinitives with or without to (see
282-283), some verbs can be followed by -ing forms, with or without a
preposition (see 296), and some by clauses. Many verbs can be followed
by more than one of these structures,

often with a difference of meaning or use. For each verb, it is
necessary to know which structures are possible.

We seem to have a problem, (not We seem -hetving-a-problem.)

Can I help wash up?

It's not very easy to stop smoking. (not ...-tostep-te-smeke:)

We're thinking of moving, (not We're thinking to move.)

I suggest that you see a solicitor. or I suggest seeing a solicitor.

(not I suggest you to see a solicitor.)

Sometimes the first verb does not give information about the subject -
it says more about the action which the second verb refers to.

I happened to see Alice the other day.

We're starting to get invited to some of the neighbours' parties.

My keys seem to have disappeared.

It is possible to have 'chains* of verbs following each other.

I keep forgetting to go shopping.

Don't let me stop you working.

He seems to be trying to sit up.

I don't want to have to get her to start telling lies.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark49>>9 verb + object + verb

Many verbs can be followed by an object as well as a verb structure.

Can I help you wash up?

I'd like you to meet Sally.

We all want you to be happy, (not We-aH-want that you are happy.)

We've got to stop him making a fool of himself When are you going to get
the clock repaired?

Nobody told me that you were here.

For more about verb + object + infinitive, see 283.

For structures with object + -ing form, see 296.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark50>>10 verb + object + complement

Some transitive verbs can be followed by an object together with an
object complement (an expression that gives more information about the
object). For details, see 607.

You make me nervous. Let's paint it blue.

See the Index for problems with the structures after some common verbs.

For information about other verbs, see a good dictionary.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark51>>607 verb + object + complement

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark52>>1 adjective and noun complements

Some transitive verbs can be followed by an object together with an
object complement (an expression that gives more information about the
object). This is often an adjective or noun phrase.

You make me nervous.

She's driving us crazy.    I find her attitude strange.

Let's cut it short.    Don't call me a liar.

I don't know why they elected him President

Would you like to join the committee? *1 would consider it an honour.

A long and heavy object may come after the complement Compare:

He painted the wall red. (not He-painted-red-the wall)

He painted red all of the kitchen walls as well as the window frames and
ceiling.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark53>>2    see, describe etc: structure with as

After some verbs, an object complement is introduced by as. This is
common when we say how we see or describe somebody/something.

I see you as a basically kind person.

She described her attacker as a tall dark man with a beard.

His mother regards him as a genius.

After tests, they identified the metal as gold.

The structure is also possible with as being.

The police do not regard him as (being) dangerous.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark54>>3    verbs of thinking and feeling:
structure with to be

Some verbs that refer to thoughts, feelings and opinions (e.g. believe,
consider, feel know, find, understand) can be followed by object +
infinitive (usually to be) in a formal style. In an informal style,
rfzaf-clauses are more common.

I considered him to be an excellent choice.

(Less formal: I considered that he was ...)

We supposed them to be married.

(Less formal: We supposed that they were...)

They believed her to be reliable.

(Less formal: They believed that she was reliable.)

This structure is very unusual with think.

I thought that she was mistaken.

(More natural than I thought her to be mistaken.)

To be can be dropped after consider.

I considered him (to be) an excellent choice.

Passive forms of these structures may be less formal than active forms
(see paragraph 6 below).

For more details of structures with feel, see 202; for know, see 313;
for think, see 588.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark55>>4    They found her (to be)...

After find + object, to be suggests the result of a test or
investigation. Compare:

-    Everybody found her very pleasant The doctors found her to be
perfectly fit

-    I found the bicycle very comfortable to ride.

The testers found this bicycle to be the best value for money.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark56>>5    structures with preparatory it

When the object of a verb is a clause, infinitive structure or -ing
structure, and there is an object complement, it is common to use it as
a preparatory object. Compare:

She made her views clear.

She made it clear that she disagreed (not She made-that she disagreed
dear.)

For details of this structure, see 447.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark57>>6 passive structures

Passive versions of these structures are common.

It was painted blue.

He was elected President

Her attacker was described as a tall man with a beard The metal was
identified as gold.

He is not regarded as being dangerous.

For a long time he was thought to be a spy:

She was believed to belong to a revolutionary organisation.

Seven people are understood to have been injured in the explosion. It
was considered impossible to change the date.

For the structures that are possible after a particular verb, see a good
dictionary.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark58>>608 verbs of movement: she ran in etc

When we want to talk about a movement, its direction and its nature,
there are several possibilities. We can use three separate words for the
three ideas:

She came in running.

We can use a verb which includes the idea of direction, and describe the
nature of the movement separately:

She entered running.

Or we can use a verb which makes clear the nature of the movement, and
describe the direction separately:

She ran in

In English, the third of these solutions is the most common.

She danced across the garden.

(More natural than She crossed the garden dancing.)

I jumped down the stairs.

(More natural than I came down the stairs jumping.)

They crawled out of the cellar.

We flew past Mont Blanc.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark59>>609 verbs with both active and passive
meanings

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark60>>1 She opened the door/ The door opened

Some verbs are used transitively and intransitively with different kinds
of subject. The intransitive use has a meaning rather like a passive
(see 412) or reflexive (see 493) verb. Compare:

-    She opened the door.    - Something woke her.

The door opened    Suddenly she woke.

-    The wind's moving the curtain - I can't start the car.

The curtain's moving.    The car won't start.

-    Marriage has really changed her.

She's changed a lot since she got married

-    We're selling a lot of copies of your book

Your book's selling well.    >

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark61>>2 It scratches easily

The intransitive structure is used with a lot of verbs that refer to
things we can do to materials: for example bend, break, crack, melt,
polish, scratch, stain, tear, unscrew.

Be careful what you put on the table - it scratches easily. (= You can
easily scratch it.)

These glasses are so fragile: they break if you look at them.

The carpet's made of a special material that doesn't stain.

The handle won't unscrew - can you help me?

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark62>>610 verbs with two objects

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark63>>1 indirect and direct objects: I gave John
the keys

Many verbs can have two objects - usually a person and a thing. This
often happens with verbs that are used to talk about transferring or
communicating things from one person to another, or doing things for
somebody. A few other verbs are also used in this way. Common examples:

| bet     | get     | make    | play      | sell   | teach   |
| bring   | give    | offer   | post      | send   | tell    |
| build   | kick    | owe     | promise   | show   | throw   |
| buy     | leave   | pass    | read      | sing   | wish    |
| cost    | lend    | pay     | refuse    | take   | write   |

The thing that is given, sent, bought etc is called the 'direct object';
the person who gets it is the ‘indirect object*. Most often, the
indirect object comes first. / bet you ten dollars you can't beat me at
chess.

He built the children a tree-house.

Shall I buy you some chocolate while fm out?

Could you bring me the paper?

The repair cost me a lot I gave John the keys.

If you're going upstairs, could you get me my coat?

He left his children nothing when he died.

Lend me your bike, can you?

I'll make you a cake tomorrow.

I owe my sister a lot of money.

Can I play you my new album?

HI post her the report tomorrow.

They promised me all sorts of things.

Daddy, read me a story.

He sent his mother a postcard Let's take her some flowers.

Will you teach me poker?

We bought the children pizzas.

Throw me the ball

We wish you a Merry Christmas.

Not all verbs with this kind of meaning can be used like this - see
paragraph 6.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark64>>2    indirect object last: I gave the keys
to John

We can also put the indirect object after the direct object. In this
case it normally has a preposition (usually to or for).

I gave the keys to John.

I handed my licence to the policeman.

Mrs Norman sent some flowers to the nurse.

Mother bought the ice-cream for you, not for me.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark65>>3    two pronouns: Lend them to her

When both objects are pronouns, it is common to put the indirect object
last. To is occasionally dropped after it in informal British English.

Lend them to her. Send some to him. Give it (to) me.

It is also possible to put the indirect object first.

Give her one. Send him some.

However, this structure is avoided in some cases: phrases ending with it
or them (e.g. He gave you it or Send them them) are often felt to be
unnatural.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark66>>4    wh-qu est ions: Who did you buy it for?

Prepositions are used in wft-questions referring to the indirect object.

Who did you buy it for? (not Who did you buy it?)

Who was it sent to? (not Who-tms-k-sent?)

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark67>>5    passives: I've been given a picture

When these verbs are used in passive structures, the subject is usually
the person who receives something, not the thing which is sent, given
etc.

I've just been given a lovely picture.

We were all bought little presents.

However, the thing which is given, sent etc can be the subject if
necessary. What happened to the stuff he left behind?* Well, the picture
was given to Mr Ferguson.

For details of these passive structures, see 415.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark68>>6    structures with donate, push, carry,
explain, suggest, describe and take

Not all verbs with this kind of meaning can be followed by indirect
object + direct object. The structure is not possible, for example, with
donate, push, carry, explain, suggest or describe.

They donated money to the museum, (but not They donated the museum
money.)

I pushed the plate to Ann. (but not / pushed-Ann-theplate.)

He carried the baby to the doctor, (but not He carried the doctor the
baby.) Vd like him to explain his decision to us. (but not .. .
to-explain us his decision.)

Can you suggest a good dentist to me? (but not Can you suggest me a good
dentist?)

Please describe your wife to us. (but not Please-describe us your wife.)
Take (to) can be used with indirect object + direct object, but not take
(from). I took her some money. (= I took some money to her, not ... from
her.)

►

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark69>>7 one object or two

Some verbs can be followed by either a direct object, or an indirect
object, or both.

I asked John. / asked a question. I asked John a question. Other verbs
like this include teach, tell, pay, show, sing, pfay and write. Note
that when smg, p/ay and write have no direct object, we put to before
the indirect object. Compare:

-    Sing her a song.

Sing to her. (not Sirtg-her.)

-    Write me a letter.

Write to me when you get home.

(More common than Write me... in standard British English.)

For structures with object complements (e.g. They made him captain), see
607.

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark70>>611 very and very much

<<main-39.xhtml#bookmark71>>1    adjectives and adverbs: very kind, very
quickly

We use very, not very much, before adjectives and adverbs.

You're very kind. (not You're\^very much kind.)

The situation is very serious, (not ... very much serious.)

I came very quickly, (not ... very much quickly.)

However, very much is used before comparatives.

Tm very much happier in my new job. (not. .. very happier ..)

For very with superlatives (very first, very best etc), see 140.4.

For the very same, see 503.

<<main-40.xhtml>>

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    not very

Not very expresses quite a low degree.

It's not very warm - you'd better take a coat.

That meal wasn't very expensive. (= quite cheap.)

Note that little cannot be used in this way.

He's not very imaginative, (not He's little imaginative.)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    past participles: very much loved, very
worried

Before past participles we normally use very much.

She was very much loved by her grandchildren, (not She was very loved.)
Journey times will be very much reduced by the new road, (not .. .-very
reduced...)

But we use very with some past participles that are used as adjectives.
For details, see 410.4.

I'm very worried about Angela, (not .. .-very much worried ...)

We were very surprised when Pete passed his exam. (More common than ...
very much surprised...)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark2>>4    very much (adverb)

Very much can be an adverb.

We very much enjoyed the party, (not We very enjoyed.)

We do not normally put very much between a verb and its object.

I very much like mountains, (not / like very much mountains.)

Very much can also be a determiner before a noun.

She didn't have very much money.

Have you got very much work to do?

Very much is not often used as a determiner in affirmative clauses (see
357.5). There was a lot of snow on the road. (not There -was very -mnck
-snow.)

For very... indeed, see 273.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark3>>612    wait

Wait can be followed by an infinitive.

TU wait to hear from you before I do anything.

Before a direct object, wait for is used.

Please wait for me here. (not Please-wait-me-here.)

77zaf-clauses are not used, but an object + infinitive structure is
possible. Well have to wait for the photos to be ready. (not ... wait
that the photos are-ready:)

The time preposition for is often dropped after wait.

I waited (for) a very long time for her answer.

The transitive verb await is formal, and is used mostly with abstract
objects. We're still awaiting instructions.

For the difference between wait for and expect, see 196.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark4>>613    want

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark5>>1    infinitive with to

After want, we normally use an infinitive with to.

I don't want to come back here ever again, (not / don't want come
back-...) Tfazf-clauses are not normally used after want, but an object
+ Infinitive structure (see 283) is possible.

Do you want me to make you some coffee? (not Do you want (that) I make
you some coffee?)

I don't want that woman to come here.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark6>>2    structure with object complement

Want can be followed by an object together with a complement (adjective,
adverb or past participle) to express ideas such as change or result.

They wanted him dead    She doesn't want him back.

I want her out of there now. We want the job finished by Tuesday.

To be or as is used before a noun complement.

I want you to be my friend, (or ...as my friend, not I want you my
friend.)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark7>>3    want meaning 'need'

In informal British English, we can say that a thing 'wants* (= needs)
something, particularly with reference to actions.

That car wants a clean.    Your hair wants a good brush.

In this case, want can be followed by an -ing form (like need - see
366).

This coat wants cleaning. (= ... needs to be cleaned.)    ►

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark8>>4 'I wanna hold your hand'

In informal speech, want to often sounds like ‘wanna'. It is sometimes
spelt like this in order to represent conversational pronunciation - for
example in comic strips.

For to used instead of a whole infinitive (e.g. I don't want to,
thanks), see 182.

For want and will, see 629.8.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark9>>614    -ward(s)

Backward(s), forward(s), northward(s), outward(s) and similar words can
be used as adjectives or adverbs.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark10>>1    adjectives

When they are used as adjectives, they do not have -s.

This country is very backward in some ways.

You're not allowed to make a forward pass in rugby.

He was last seen driving in a northward direction

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark11>>2    adverbs

When these words are adverbs, they can generally be used with or without
-s. The forms with -s are generally a little more common in British
English, and the forms without -s in American English.

Why are you moving backward(s) and Jbrward(s)?

If we keep going upward(s) we must get to the top.

Let's start driving homeward(s).

In some figurative expressions such as look forward to, bring forward,
put forward, the form without -5 is always used.

I look forward to hearing from you.

She put forward a very interesting suggestion.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark12>>3    other words

Towards and afterwards are the usual forms in British English; in
American English, toward and afterward are also common.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark13>>615    way

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark14>>1    preposition dropped

In an informal style, we usually drop the prepositions in or by before
way. You're doing it (in) the wrong way. Come this way.

Do it (in) any way you like.    We went there the usual way.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark15>>2    relative structures

In an informal style, we often say the way (that) instead of the way in
I by which

I don't like the way (that) you talk to me.

Let's go the way (that) we went yesterday.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark16>>3    infinitive or -ing

After way (meaning ‘methodV'manner') we can use an infinitive structure
or of.. .ing. There is no important difference between the two
structures. There's no way to prove / of proving that he was stealing

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark17>>4    way of and means of

Way of is unusual before a noun (except in the common expression way of
life). We use means of or method of instead.

The 19th century saw a revolution in means of transport, (not ... ways
of transport.)

They tried all possible methods of instruction, but the child learnt
nothing.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark18>>5    in the way and on the way

These expressions are quite different. In the I my I etc way is used for
obstacles -things that stop people getting where they want to.

I can't get the car out because those boxes are in the way.

Please don't stand in the kitchen door - you're in my way.

On the!my etc way means 'during the journey/movement^{1} or ‘coming^{1}.

We'll have lunch on our way. Spring is on the way.

For by the way, see 157.8.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark19>>616 weak and strong forms

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark20>>1    What are weak and strong forms?

Some English words - for example at, for, have, and, us - have two
pronunciations: one is used when they are not stressed, and the other
when they are. Compare:

I'm looking at /at/ you. What are you looking at /set/?

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark21>>2    stressed or not?

Most of these words are prepositions, pronouns, conjunctions, articles
and auxiliary verbs. Such words are not usually stressed, because they
are generally found together with other more important words which carry
the stress. So the unstressed (‘weak') pronunciation is the normal one.
This usually has the vowel /a/ or no vowel; a few weak forms are
pronounced with /i/.

However, these words can be stressed when they are emphasised, or when
there is no other word to carry the stress. In these cases the ‘strong*
pronunciation is used. This has the vowel that corresponds to the
spelling. Compare:

-    I must /mas/ go now.

I really must /mASt/ stop smoking, (stressed for emphasis)

-    I was /waz/ late.

It was /waz/ raining.

Yes, it was /wdz/. (stressed at end of sentence: there is no other word
to be stressed.)

-    Where have /av/ you been?

You might have /av/ told me.

What did you have /hsev/ for breakfast? (non-auxiliary verb)    ►

Contracted negatives always have a strong pronunciation. can't /karnt/
mustn't /'mAsnt/ wasn't /'woznt/

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark22>>3 list of words with weak and strong forms

The most important words which have weak and strong forms are:

|                   | Weak form       | Strong form       |
| a                 | M               | /ei/ (unusual)    |
| am                | /(a)m/          | /aem/             |
| an                | /an/            | /aen/ (unusual)   |
| and               | /(a)n(d)/       | /aend/            |
| are               | /a(r)/          | /a:(r)/           |
| as                | /az/            | /aez/             |
| at                | /at/            | last/             |
| be                | /bi/            | /bL*/             |
| been              | /bm/            | /bfcn/            |
| but               | /bat/           | /bAt/             |
| can               | /k(a)n/         | /kaen/            |
| could             | /ked/           | /kod/             |
| do                | /d(e)/          | /du:/             |
| does              | /daz/           | IAazI             |
| for               | /fa(r)/         | /fo:(r)/          |
| from              | /fram/          | /from/            |
| had               | /(h)ad/         | /haed/            |
| has               | /(h)az/         | /haez/            |
| have              | /(h)av/         | /haev/            |
| he                | /(h)i/          | /hi:/             |
| her               | /(h)a(r)/       | /h3:(r)/          |
| him               | /(h)im/         | /him/             |
| his               | /(h)iz/         | /hxz/             |
| is                | /z, s/          | lizl              |
| must              | /m(a)s(t)/      | /mASt/            |
| not               | /nt/            | /not/             |
| of                | /av/            | /DV/              |
| our               | /a:(r)/         | /aua(r)/          |
| saint             | /s(a)nt/ (BrE   | only) /seint/     |
| shall             | /J(a)l/         | /Jael/            |
| she               | liil            | /JL-/             |
| should            | nmi             | /Jud/             |
| sir               | /sa(r)/         | /S3:(r)/          |
| some (see 546)    | /s(a)m/         | /sahi/            |
| than              | /0(a)n/         | /Oaen/ (rare)     |
| that (conj.)      | /0(a)t/         | /Oaet/            |
| the               | /6a, 0i/        | /6i:/             |
| them              | /6(a)m/         | /8em /            |
| there (see 586)   | /0a(r)/         | /6ea(r)/          |
| to                | /ta/            | /tu:/             |
| us                | /as/            | /as/              |
| was               | /w(a)z/         | /WDZ/             |
| we                | /WI /           | IwizI             |
| were              | /wa(r)/         | /W3:(r)/          |

|         | Weak form   | Strong form   |
| who     | Ihvl        | Ihu:/         |
| would   | /wad, ad/   | /wud/         |
| will    | /W(9)l/     | /wil/         |
| you     | /ju/        | /ju:/         |
| your    | /ja(r)/     | /jo:(r)/      |

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark23>>617    well

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark24>>1    well and good

Well and good can have similar meanings, but in this case well is an
adverb, while good is an adjective. Compare:

-    The car runs well (adverb modifying runs) (not The car runs good.)

It's a well-made car. (adverb modifying made)

Its a good car. (adjective modifying car)

-    He teaches very well

I like that teacher. He's good, (not He's well.)

-    She speaks English well (not She-speaks English good.)

She speaks good English.

Her English is good.

Note that we cannot say She speaks well English. (Adverbs cannot usually
go between the verb and the object - see 21.1.)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark25>>2    well = 'in good health'

There is also an adjective well, meaning 'in good health'.

How are you?* Quite well, thanks.

I don't feel very well Note that the adjective well is only used to talk
about health. Compare: When I'm in the mountains I am always well When
I'm with you Vm happy. (not When Tm withyou I^{l}m\^wett.)

Well is not common before a noun. We can say She's well, but it is less
usual to say, for example, She's a well girl

For ill and sick, see 266. For well as a discourse marker, see
157.16,17,20.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark26>>618    when and if

A person who says when (referring to the future) is sure that something
will happen. A person who says if is unsure whether it will happen.
Compare:

-    I ll see you at Christmas when we're all at Sally's place.

(We are certain to be at Sally's place.)

I'll see you in August if I come to New York.

(Perhaps Til come to New York, perhaps not.)

To talk about repeated, predictable situations and events (in the sense
of 'whenever'), both when and if can be used with little difference of
meaning. When/If you heat ice it turns to water.

When/If I'm in Liverpool I usually stay with my sister.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark27>>619    where (to)

To is often dropped after where.

Where are you going (to)? Where does this road lead (to)?

To is not normally dropped in the short question Where to?

Could you send this off for me?* Where to?

For where in relative clauses, see 494.10

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark28>>620    whether ... or ...

We can use whether... or... as a double conjunction, with a similar
meaning to It doesn't matter whether ...or...

The ticket will cost the same, whether we buy it now or wait till later.
Whether we go by bus or train, it'll take at least six hours.

Several structures are possible with whether...or not Whether you like
it or not, ...

Whether or not you like it...

Whether you like it or whether you don't,...

For whether and if see 621.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark29>>621    whether and if

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark30>>1    indirect questions

Whether and if can both introduce indirect questions.

I'm not sure whether/if I'll have time.

I asked whether/if she had any letters for me.

After verbs that are more common in a formal style, whether is
preferred.

We discussed whether we should close the shop.

(More normal than We discussed if...)

In a formal style, whether is usually preferred in a two-part question
with or. The Directors have not decided whether they will recommend a
dividend or reinvest the profits.

If an indirect question is fronted (see 513), whether is used.

Whether VU have time I'm not sure at the moment

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark31>>2    prepositions

After prepositions, only whether is possible.

There was a big argument about whether we should move to a new house.

(not ... about if we-should-move...)

I haven't settled the question of whether I'll go back home.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark32>>3    infinitives

Whether, but not if, is used before to-infinitives.

They can't decide whether to get married now or wait (not
Theyaart't-deeide if to get married...)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark33>>4    subject, complement and adverbial
clauses

When a question-word clause is a subject or complement, whether is
normally preferred.

Whether we can stay with my mother is another matter, (subject)

The question is whether the man can be trusted, (complement)

The question is if... is also possible, but less common.

The question is if the man can be trusted.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark34>>5    not used in echo questions

7f and whether are not normally used in ‘echo questions* (see 483).

Are you happy?*Am I happy? No! (not .. .-If/Whether I'm-happy?-...)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark35>>622 which, what and who: question words

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark36>>1    which and what, the difference

Which and what are often both possible, with little difference of
meaning. Which/What is the hottest city in the world?

Which/What train did you come on?

Which/What people have influenced you most in your life?

We prefer which when we have a limited number of choices in mind.

We've got white or brown bread. Which will you have?

(More natural than ... What will you have?)

Which size do you want - small, medium or large?

When we are not thinking of a limited number of choices, what is
preferred. What language do they speak in Greenland?

(More natural than Which language...)

What's your phone number? (not Which-is-your phone number?)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark37>>2    determiners: which and what

Before nouns, which and what can be used to ask questions about both
things and people.

Which teacher do you like best?

Which colour do you want - green, red, yellow or brown?

What writers do you like? What colour are your baby's eyes?

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark38>>3    which of

Before another determiner (e.g. the, my, these) or a pronoun, we use
which of Who and what are not normally used with o/like this in modem
English. Which of your teachers do you like best? (not Who/What
ofy&ttr-tmchers...) Which of us is going to do the washing up? (not Who
of us ...?)

Which of these coats is yours? (not What of these...?)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark39>>4    without nouns: who for people

When these words are not followed by nouns or pronouns, we generally use
who, not which, for people.

Who won - Smith or Fitzgibbon? (not Which won ...?)

Who are you going out with - Lesley or Maria?    »

However, which can be used in questions about people's identity, and
what can be used to ask about people's jobs and functions.

Which is your husband?* The one in jeans.

So Janet's the Managing Director. What's Peter?

For the difference between who and whom, see 623.

For relative who and which (e.g. the man who...), see 494. For relative
what (e.g. what I need is.. 0, see 497.

For singular and plural verbs after who and what, see 532.3.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark40>>623 who and whom

Whom is unusual in informal modem English.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark41>>1    questions: Who did they arrest?

We normally use who as an object in questions.

Who did they arrest?

Prepositions usually come at the end of who-questions (see 452).

Who did she go with?

In a very formal style, whom is sometimes used.

Whom did they arrest? (formal)

Prepositions normally come before whom.

With whom did she go? (very formal)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark42>>2    relative clauses: the man (who) we met

In identifying relative clauses, (see 495), whom is unusual in an
informal style. Either we leave out the object pronoun, or we use that
or who (see 494-495 for details).

There*s the man (that)/(who) we met in the pub last night.

In a formal style whom is more common.

She married a man whom she met at a conference.

In non-identifying relative clauses (see 495), we usually use whom as an
object when necessary (but these clauses are uncommon in informal
English).

This is John Perkins, whom you met at the sales conference.

J have a number of American relatives, most of whom live in Texas.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark43>>3    who(m) he thought etc

In a sentence like He was trying to find an old school friend, who(m) he
thought was living in New Zealand, people are often unsure whether whom
is possible (because it seems to be the object of the first following
verb) or whether they should use who (because it is the subject of the
second verb). Who is considered more correct, but whom is sometimes
used. Another example: There is a child in this class who(m) / believe
is a musical genius.

In cases with a following infinitive, usage is mixed, but whom is
considered more correct.

There is a child in the class who(m) I believe to be a musical genius.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark44>>624    who ever, what ever etc

These expressions show surprise or difficulty in understanding
something. Who ever is that strange girl with Roger?

What ever are you doing?

How ever did you manage to start the car? I couldn't When ever will I
have time to write some letters?

Why ever did I marry you?

The expressions can also be written as single words: whoever, whatever
etc. Note that whose and which are not used with ever in this way.

In an informal style, on earth, the hell (AmE also in hell) or the fuck
(taboo -see 575) can be used instead of ever.

Who on earth is that strange girl? Why the hell did I marry you?

What the fuck is she talking about?

For the conjunctions whoever, whatever, etc, see 625.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark45>>625    whoever, whatever etc

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark46>>1    meaning and use

Whoever means 'it doesn't matter who', ‘any person who', or ‘the unknown
person who'. Whatever, whichever, however, whenever and wherever have
similar ‘open' meanings.

A word of this kind has a double function, like a relative pronoun or
adverb (see 498.1). It acts as a subject, object or adverb in its own
clause, but it also acts as a conjunction, joining its clause to the
rest of the sentence. Examples: Whoever phoned just now was very polite.

Vm not opening the door, whoever you are.

Send it to whoever pays the bills.

Whatever you do, I'll always love you.

Whatever is in that box is making a very funny noise.

Keep calm, whatever happens.

Spend the money on whatever you like.

Whichever of them you marry, you'll have problems

We're free all next week. You'll be welcome whichever day you come.

However much he eats, he never gets fat.

People always want more; however rich they are.

However you travel, it'll take you at least three days.

Whenever I go to London I try to see Vicky.

You can come whenever you like.

Wherever you go, you'll find Coca-Cola.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark47>>2    whoever, whichever and whatever,
subjects and objects

Whoever, whichever and whatever can be the subjects or objects of the
verbs in their clauses. (Note that whomever is not used in modem
English.)

Whoever directed this film, it's no good, (subject of directed)

Whoever you marry, make sure he can cook (object of marry)

Whatever you say, I don't think he's the right man. (object of say)    »

Whichever and whatever can also go with nouns as determiners.

Whichever room you use, make sure you clean it up afterwards.

Whatever problems you have, you can always come to me for help.

If you change your mind for whatever reason, just let me know.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark48>>3    clauses as subjects or objects

A clause with whoever, whichever and whatever can be the subject or
object of the verb in the other clause.

Whoever told you that was lying. (subject of was lying)

I'll marry whoever J like, (object of marry)

Whichever climber gets to the top first will get a £5,000 prize.
(subject of will get)

I'll take whichever tent you're not using, (object of take)

Whatever you want is fine with me. (subject of is)

Prisoners have to eat whatever they're given, (object of eat)

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark49>>4    whenever - 'every time that*

Whenever can suggest repetition, in the sense of 'every time that*.

Whenever I see you I feel nervous.

I stay with Monica whenever I go to London.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark50>>5    whoever etc ... may

May can be used to suggest ignorance or uncertainty.

He's written a book on the philosopher Matilda Vidmi, whoever she may
be. She's just written to me from Llandyfrdwy, wherever that may be.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark51>>6    leaving out the verb: whatever his
problems

In a clause like whatever his problems are, where whatever is the
complement of the verb be, it is possible to leave out the verb.

Whatever his problems, he has no right to behave like that.

A serious illness, whatever its nature, is almost always painful After
however + adjective, we can leave out a pronoun + be.

A grammar rule, however true (it is), is useless unless it can be
understood.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark52>>7    informal uses: short answers

In an informal style, these conjunctions are sometimes used as short
answers. When shall we start?* Whenever. (= Whenever you like.)

Potatoes or rice?* Whichever. (= I don't mind.)

Whatever is often used to mean ‘I don't care' or Tm not interested'.
This can sound rude.

What would you like to do? We could go and see a film, or go swimming. *
Whatever.

Or whatever can mean 'or anything else'.

Would you like some orange juice or a beer or whatever?

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark53>>If you play football or tennis or whatever,
it does take up a lot of time.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark54>>8    whatever meaning 'at all'

After any and no, whatever can be used to mean 'at all*.

Don't you have any regrets whatever?

I can see no point whatever in buying it.

In a formal style, whatsoever is sometimes used as an emphatic form of
whatever in this structure.

For other uses of whatever and however, see a good dictionary.

For who ever, what ever etc, see 624.

For no matter who/what/etc, see 378.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark55>>626    whose: question word

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark56>>1    with a noun or alone

The question word whose can be used with a noun as a determiner like my,
your etc.

Whose car is that outside?

Whose garden do you think looks the nicest?

Whose can also be used alone, like mine, yours etc.

Whose is that car outside? Whose is this?* Mine.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark57>>2    prepositions

Prepositions can normally come either before whose (more formal) or at
the end of the clause (less formal). See 452 for details.

For whose benefit were all these changes made?

Whose side are you on?

In short questions with no verb, prepositions can only come before
whose. Vm going to buy a car. * With whose money? (not
Whose-money-tviih?)

For the relative pronoun whose, see 496. For whose and who's, see 627.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark58>>627    whose and who's

Whose is a possessive word meaning ‘of whom /which*, used in questions
and relative clauses. Who's is the contraction of who is or who has.
Compare:

-    Whose is that coat? (not Who's is that coat?)

It was a decision whose importance was not realised at the time.

(not ...-tvhoh-importanee ...)

-    Do you know anybody who's going to France in the next few days?

(not .. . anybody whose going...)

I've got a cousin who's never been to London. (not ... whose never
been...) There is a similar confusion between its and it's: see 305.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark59>>628    why and why not

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark60>>1 replies

We generally use Why not?, not Why?, in short replies to negative
statements. Compare:

They've decided to move to Devon. * Why?

I can't manage tomorrow evening. ~ Why not?

(More natural than Why?)

Why not? can also be used to agree to a suggestion.

Let's eat out this evening. ~ Yes, why not?    ►

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark61>>2    Why should...?

A structure with why followed by should can suggest surprise.

I wonder why she should want to go out with me.

The structure can also suggest anger or refusal to do something.

J don't see why we should have to pay for your mistake.

Give me a cigarette. * Why should I?

For a similar structure with how, see 482.2.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark62>>3    infinitive structures

Why can be followed by an infinitive without to. This structure can
suggest that an action is unnecessary or poindess.

Why argue with him? He'll never change his mind, (not Why arguing...?

or Why to argue-...?)

Why pay more at other shops? We have the best value.

Why not + infinitive without to is used to make suggestions.

Sandy's in a bad mood. * Why not give her some flowers?

Why don't...? can be used in the same way.

Why don't you give her some flowers?

Why don't we go and see Julie?

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark63>>629 will: various uses

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark64>>1    forms

Will is a modal auxiliary verb (see 353-354). It has no -s in the third
person singular; questions and negatives are made without do; after
will, we use an infinitive without to.

Will the train be on time?

Contractions are 7/, won't.

Do you think it'll rain?    It won't rain.

Would is used as a past or less definite form of will for some of its
meanings; for details, see 633.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark65>>2    future auxiliary

We can use will as an auxiliary verb when we talk about the future. For
details, see 212.

I wiU be happy when this is finished.

This time tomorrow I'll be sitting in the sun He will have finished the
whole job by this evening,

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark66>>3    certainty

Will can express certainty or confidence about present or future
situations. As I'm sure you will understand, we cannot wait any longer
for our order. Don't phone them now - they'U be having dinner.

There's somebody coming up the stairs. That'll be Mary.

Tomorrow will be cloudy, with some rain.

Will have + past participle refers to the past.

Dear Sir, You will recently have received a form ...

We can't go and see them now - they'll have gone to bed.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark67>>4    willingness and decisions

Will can express the speaker's willingness, or announce a decision.

Can somebody help me?* I will There's the doorbell.*Fll go.

Will can express a firm intention, a promise or a threat.

I really wiU stop smoking.

Fll definitely pay you back next week Fll kill her for this.

We can use will not or won't to talk about unwillingness or refusal.

She won't open the door.

Give me a kiss. * No, I won't The car won't start Would not can refer to
past refusal.

She wouldn't open the door. The car wouldn't start this morning.

For details of these uses, see 217.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark68>>5    requests, orders and offers

We use will you to tell people what to do.

Will you send me the bill, please?

Come this way, will you?    Will you be quiet!

Would you is ‘softer', more polite.

Would you send me the bill, please?

Come this way, would you?

Will you...? can also be used to ask about people's wishes.

Will you have some more potatoes? What wiU you drink?

Won't you ...? expresses a pressing offer.

Won't you have some more wine?

Will can be used in affirmative structures to give impersonal,
military-type orders.

All staff will submit weekly progress reports.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark69>>6    distancing: I'll have to ask you ...

Instructions and orders can be made less direct by ‘distancing' (see
436) - for example by using will to displace them into the fliture.

Fm afraid you'll need to fill in this form.

Fll have to ask you to wait a minute.

And will is sometimes used to say how much money is owed.

That will be £1.65, please.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark70>>7    typical behaviour

We can use will to talk about typical behaviour.

She'll sit talking to herself for hours.

When you look at clouds they will often remind you of animals.

If something breaks down and you kick it, it will often start working
again. Sulphuric acid will dissolve most metals.

Stressed will can be used to criticise people's typical behaviour.

She will fall in love with the wrong people.

Well, if you will keep telling people what you think of them ...

Would is used in a similar way to refer to the past. For details, see
633.7. ».

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark71>>8 will and want

Will and want can both be used to talk about wishes, but they are rather
different. Will is used mostly in ‘interpersonal^{1} ways, to express
wishes that affect other people through orders, requests, offers,
promises etc. Want simply refers to people's wishes - nothing more. Will
is to do with actions, want is to do with thoughts. Compare:

-    Will you open the window? (an order)

Do you want to open the window? (a question about somebody's wishes)

-    She won*t tell anybody. (= She refuses to ...)

She doesn't want to tell anybody. (= She prefers not to ...)

Note that will cannot be used with a direct object.

Do you want / Would you like an aspirin? (not Wibl-you-art-aspmn?)

For a comparison between will and going to, see 216, 218.

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark72>>630 wish

<<main-40.xhtml#bookmark73>>1    wish + infinitive

We can use wish + infinitive to mean want. Wish is very formal in this
sense. Note that progressive forms are not used.

I wish to see the manager, please. (not I'-m-wisking-to-see-...)

If you wish to reserve a table, please telephone after five o'clock An
object + infinitive structure is also possible.

We do not wish our names to appear in the report.

Wish + direct object is not normal without a following infinitive.

I want / would like an appointment with the manager, (not I wish an
appointment with the manager.)

<<main-41.xhtml>>

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark0>>2    I wish you...

Wish is used with two objects in some fixed expressions of good wishes.

I wish you a Merry Christmas.

We all wish you a speedy recovery.

Here's wishing you all the best in your new job.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark1>>3    wish + rtaf-clause: meaning

We can also use wish with a clause (that can be dropped in an informal
style). In this case, wish does not mean 'want' - it expresses regret
that things are not different, and refers to situations that are unreal,
impossible or unlikely. Tenses are similar to those used with if {see
below).

I wish (that) I was better looking.

Don't you wish (that) you could fly?

We all wish (that) the snow would stay forever Wish + ffuzf-clause is
not generally used for wishes about things that seem possible in the
future. We often use hope in this sense (see 250).

I hope you pass your exams. (not I wish yott-would pass your exams.)

I hope you feel better tomorrow. (not / wish you felt better tomorrow.)

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark2>>4    wish + that-clause: tenses

In a that- clause after wish, we generally use the same tenses as we
would use, for instance, after 'It would be nice if.. / (see 258). Past
tenses are used with a present or future meaning.

I wish I spoke French. (= It would be nice if I spoke French.)

I wish I had a yacht. I wish tomorrow was Sunday.

All the staff wish you weren't leaving so soon.

Do you ever wish you lived somewhere else?

Were can be used Instead of was in this structure, especially in a
formal style.

I wish that I were better looking.

Past perfect tenses are used for wishes about the past.

I wish you hadn't said that. (= It would be nice if you hadn't said
that.) Now she wishes she had gone to university.

In informal speech, sentences like I wish you'd have seen it sometimes
occur. For similar structures with if, see 262.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark3>>5    wish ... would

Would is very common in ffcaf-clauses after wish (much more common than
it is in (f-clauses). Sentences with wish... would express regret or
annoyance that something will not happen.

Everybody wishes you would go home. {- Why won't you go home?)

I wish you would stop smoking. (= Why won't you stop smoking?)

I wish the postman would come soon. (But it looks as if he won't.)

I wish it would stop raining. (= It will keep on raining!)

Don't you wish that this moment would last for ever?

Sentences with wish ... wouldn't refer to things that do or will happen.

I wish you wouldn't keep making that stupid noise.

(= You will keep making ...)

Wish ... would(n't) can be like an order or a critical request. Compare:

-    I wish you wouldn't drive so fast. (Similar to Please don't drive
so fast.)

I wish you didn't drive so fast (More like I'm sorry you drive so fast.)

-    I wish you wouldn't work on Sundays. (= Why don't you stop?)

I wish you didn't work on Sundays. (= It's a pity.)

For similar structures with if only, see 265.

For other cases where past tenses have present or future meanings, see
426.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark4>>631 with

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark5>>1 trembling with rage, blue with cold etc

With is used in a number of expressions which say how people are showing
their emotions and sensations.

My father was trembling with rage.

Annie was jumping up and down with excitement.

When I found her she was blue with cold.

white with fear/rage    green with envy

red with anger!embarrassment shivering with cold    ►

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark6>>2    angry with etc

With is also used after a number of adjectives which say how people are
feeling towards others.

Vm cross with you. furious with    upset with

angry with    pleased with

After words which say how people act towards others (like kind, nice,
polite, rude, good), we generally use to, not with.

She was very nice to me. (not ... nice with me.)

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark7>>3    with meaning 'against'

After fight, struggle, quarrel, argue, play and words with similar
meanings, with can be used with the same meaning as against.

Don't fight with him - he's bigger than you are.

Will you play chess with me?

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark8>>4    accompanying circumstances and reasons

With can introduce accompanying circumstances or reasons (rather like
and there is!was or because there is!was).

The runners started the race with a light following wind With all this
work to do, I won't have time to go out.

With friends like you, who needs enemies?

Without can be used in similar ways.

Without Sue and Jake, we're going to have trouble finishing the repairs.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark9>>5    possession

With is very often used, like have, to indicate possession and similar
ideas. There are so many people around with no homes (= ... who have no
homes.)

They've bought a house with a big garden.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark10>>6    clothing, voices, transport etc

Note that in is often used instead of with to refer to articles of
clothing. Who's the man in the funny hat?

Could you go and give this paper to the woman in glasses?

We say in a ... voice, not with a .. -voice.

Why are you talking in such a loud voice?

Note also: by car!train etc (not with the car etc), and write in
pencillink.

For the difference between by and with, see 119.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark11>>632 worth

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark12>>1 worth a lot, etc

Worth can be followed by an expression describing the value of
something. That piano must be worth a lot.

I don't think their pizzas are worth the money.

Shall I talk to Rob?* It's not worth the trouble.

In questions about value, either what or how much can be used.

What I How much is that painting worth?

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark13>>2    a million dollars' worth of...

A possessive can be used before worth in expressions with numbers.

They've ordered a million dollars' worth of computer software.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark14>>3    It's worth talking to Joe; Joe's worth
talking to

To talk about the value of an activity, we can use an -ing form with
worth. The -ing clause cannot be the subject; we often use preparatory
it.

It's worth talking to Joe. (not Talking to Joe is worth.)

It isn't worth repairing the car.

Is it worth visiting Leicester?

We can also use a structure in which the object of the -ing form (Joe,
the car, Leicester) is made the subject of the sentence.

Joe's worth talking to.

The car isn't worth repairing (not The car isn't iuorth repairing it. or
The car isn't worth to be repaired.)

Is Leicester worth visiting?

For more about structures in which the object of a verb is the subject
of the sentence (e.g. She's easy to amuse), see 284.4.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark15>>4    It's worth it

We often use It's (not) worth it to say whether something is worth
doing.

If you pay a bit more you get a room to yourself I think ifs worth it.

Shall we go and see the castle?*No, it's not worth it.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark16>>5    worthwhile

Worthwhile (or worth while) is sometimes used instead of worth,
particularly to express the idea ‘worth spending time*.

Is it worthwhile visiting Leicester?

Infinitives are also possible after worthwhile.

We thought it might be worthwhile to compare the two years' accounts.
Note also the structure worth somebody's while.

Would you like to do some gardening for me? I'll make it worth your
while. (= ... I'll pay you enough.)

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark17>>6    well worth

Worth can be modified by well.

Leicester's well worth visiting, (not .. . very worth ...)

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark18>>633 would: various uses

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark19>>1 forms

Would, the past form of will, is a modal auxiliary verb (see 353-354).
Questions and negatives are made without do; after would, we use an
infinitive without to.

Would your daughter like to play with my little girl?

Contractions are'd, wouldn't.

I'd like some advice, please.

I wish she wouldn't take things so seriously.    *

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark20>>2    would and will

Would is used as a softer, less definite form of will (see 629), or in
some cases as the past of will

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark21>>3    indirect speech

In indirect speech, would is used after past reporting verbs where will
was used in direct speech. For details, see 275.

DIRECT SPEECH: Tomorrow will be fine.

INDIRECT SPEECH: The forecast said the next day would be fine.

Would itself does not usually change in indirect speech (see 278).
DIRECTSPEECH: Would you like some help? indirect SPEECH: She asked if I
would like some help.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark22>>4    future in the past

Would is also used to express the idea of 'future in the past' - to talk
about a past action which had not yet happened at the time we are
talking about. For details, see 221.

In Berlin, he first met the woman whom he would one day marry.

There was a chance that my letter would arrive in time.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark23>>5    interpersonal uses

Would is used in polite requests and offers as a softer form of will.

Would you open the window, please?

If you would come this way...

Would you mind standing up for a moment?

Would you like tea, or would you prefer coffee?

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark24>>6    past willingness and refusals

Would can refer to past willingness of a general kind, but not to
willingness to do something on a particular past occasion. Compare:

She would hoover, dust and iron, but she didn't like doing windows.

She agreed to come and see me. (not She -wouid-eome and see-me.)

But would not can be used to refer to a refusal on a particular past
occasion. I asked him very politely, but he wouldn't tell me.

The car wouldn't start again this morning.

For present refusals with will not / won't, see 629.4.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark25>>7    typical behaviour

Would is used as the past of will (see 629.7) to talk about typical
behaviour in the past.

When she was old, she would sit in the corner talking to herself for
hours. Sometimes he would bring me little presents without saying why.

On Sundays when I was a child we would all get up early and go fishing.
Sentences with stressed would can be used to criticise people's
behaviour.

He was a nice boy, but he WOULD talk about himself all the time.

Stressed would can also be used to criticise a single past action - the
meaning is ‘that's typical of you'.

You would tell Mary about the party - I didn't want to invite her.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark26>>8    would and used to

Used to (see 604) can refer to repeated actions and events in the past,
in the same way as would.

When she was old, she used to sit in the comer talking to herself for
hours. Sometimes he used to bring me little presents without saying why.

But only used to can refer to past states. Compare:

When we were children we would / used to go skating every winter.

I used to have an old Rolls-Royce. (but not i-woidd-have an old
Rolls-Royce.) And we use used to, not would, to talk about regular and
important habitual behaviour.

Robert used to play a lot of football, (not Robert would play-...)

I used to smoke, (not I wouldsmoke.)

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark27>>9    conditional auxiliary: I would ...if

Would (first person also I! we should - see 258) is often used as an
auxiliary with verbs that refer to unreal or uncertain situations - for
example in sentences with if (Compare the use of will!shall to refer to
more definite situations.)

I would/should tell you if I knew.

It would have been nice if he'd thanked you.

We would/should like to talk to you for a minute.

For would after wish, see 630.5. For would after if only, see 265.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark28>>634 yes and no

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark29>>1    answers to negatives

In English, yes is used with affirmative sentences and no with negative
sentences. In answers to negative questions and statements, yes and no
are chosen according to the form of the answer, not in order to show
agreement or disagreement with the speaker.

Aren't you going out?* No, I*m not. (not Yes, I'm not)

I have no money: ~No, I haven't either, (not Yes; I haver\^ttoo.)

Haven't you got a raincoat?* Yes, I have, (not No, I have.)

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark30>>2    contradicting

Some languages have a special word for contradicting negative statements
or suggestions (e.g. French si or German dock). English does not have a
word like this. We often use a short answer structure (see 517).

The phone isn't working. * (Yes,) it is. (not ■The phone isn't working.
~ ¥es:) Affirmative sentences are contradicted with negative short
answers.

It's raining. * (No,) it isn't

For more about negative questions, see 368.

Forces and no in answers to Dot Would you mind...?, see 351.

<<main-41.xhtml#bookmark31>>Index

a/an 61-63, 65-68, 70; a and one in numbers 389.11; a with half 231.4;
generalisations (e.g. a child needs...) 68.2; position with
asfhowlsoltoo + adjective 14; with quite and rather 489-490; the
difference between a and an 65.7; 70 miles an hour etc 389.20; weak and
strong form 616.3; with uncountable nouns 149.4; see also articles a-
(prefix) 445.1

a bit 107; softening expression 437.1;

with comparatives 140.1 a couple of ... + plural verb 526.2 a few, few
and (a) little 329; with of

329.2 a great deal 333.4 a group of ... + plural verb 526.2 a large
amount/number 333.4 a little, little and (a) few 329; with of 329.2; a
little with comparatives 140.1 a long time and long 330 a long way and
far 200 a lot, lots 333.2; with comparatives 140; a lot of... -1 plural
verb 526.2 a number of ... + plural verb 526.2 abbreviated styles 1
abbreviations 2 able be able to 3 -able (suffix) 445.4 about and (a)
round 60; and on 4 about to 5 above and over 6 accents 308.3 accept and
agree 7 accommodation uncountable 148.3 according to 8 accuse
preposition 449 accused the accused 17.3 accustomed + -ing form or
infinitive

299.11

ache simple or progressive 466.7 acre 389.18 acronyms 2.3

across, over and through 10 act and play 432.2 active verb forms 10
actor and actress 222.4 actual(ly) 11, 157.15,16,20 AD and BC 152.3
addition in addition 157.11 addresses at, in and on 81.6; in letters

146.1-4; in emails 147.1,3 adjectives 12-19 + for ... to ... 291.3,4 -i-
infinitive 284 + -ing form 297

adjectives and adverbs of manner [happy and happily etc) 26 adjectives
or adverbs: confusing cases 27

after link verbs {be, seem, look etc)

328.2

after sit, stand, lie, fall etc 328.5 before personal pronouns (e.g.
Poor you!) 429.7

comparison 137, 139-141 complementation: what can follow an adjective?
19 leaving out words after adjectives

180.1

order before nouns 15 position 12; after as, how, so, too 14; after
measurement nouns 13.4; after nouns and pronouns 13; after object 12.4;
with something, everything etc

13.6

use of commas 476.5 with and 16 without nouns 17

word order with complements (e.g. skilled in design) 13.5 admired much
admired 410.4 admit ...ing296.1 adopted position and meaning 410.3
advanced active past participle 409.3,4 adverb particles (e.g. back,
off, out) 20;

in two-part verbs 599 adverbs position 21-25; adverbs of manner and
adjectives (happily and happy etc) 26; adverbs or adjectives: confusing
cases 27; comparison 138; ending in -ly. spelling 557; often etc with
present perfect 455.6; position with ought to 403.6; with used to 604.5;
yesterday etc not used with present perfect 456.2 advertisements words
left out 1.1 advice uncountable 148.3; + subjunctive 567.2 advise +
object + infinitive 277.1, 283;

+ -ing form or infinitive 299.4 afford to ... 282 afloat position 12.3
afraid position 12.3; afraid so!not 539; be afraid 92.1: be afraid and
fear 28; with -ing form or infinitive 299.13; I'm afraid meaning Tm
sorry' 28.2,

157.16

after (adverb) shortly after etc 29.1;

and afterwards 29.2 after (conjunction) 30; after...ing 30.4, 411.6; +
present perfect 30.3; + present with future meaning 30.2, 580.2; + past
or past perfect 424.1

after all 31, 157.19; and finally 31.2 afterward(s) 614.3; and after
29.2 again and back 87 age 32; use of be 92.2 age expressions with no
preposition 451.8; preposition 32; ‘unmarked' use 350

-age (suffix) 445.2 aged pronunciation 18 agent in passive structures
413 ages ini for ages 312.9 ago 33; and before 33.4; and for 33.3; not
used with present perfect 456.2; tenses 33.2; word order 33.1 agree
structures 298.2; + infinitive

277.1, 282; agree and accept 7; I agree (simple present) 466.4; it was
agreed to ... 417.2; non-progressive verb 471.2; preposition 449 ain't
143.4 Note 5

aircraft singular and plural the same

524.3 -al (suffix) 445.2,4 alight position 12.3 alike 34; position 12.3
alive position 12.3 all 35-40

all and all of 36.1; and both 35.1; and every 39; and whole 40 all,
everybody and everything 38 all I want is... etc 130.5 all that...
(relative structure) 494.5 expressions with no preposition

451.2

following article dropped 70.5 all... but 116.1

all day/week etc 36.5; all day and every day etc 39.4 all else 183.1

all right (showing change of subject) 157.8; and alright 41 all the
better, all the more important etc 141.2 all the same 157.5 all together
and altogether 50 allow + object + infinitive 283; + -ing form or
infinitive 299.4; allow, permit and let 42; I was allowed to 418.1
almost position 24.4; with superlatives 140.3; almost, nearly and
practically 43

alone position 12.3; alone, lonely, lonesome and lone 44 along and
through 45 aloud and loudly 334 already tenses 566.7; with present
perfect 455.5; yet, still and already 566

also position 24.6, 46.1; and even 189.3; discourse marker 157.11; not
only... but also 383; too, also and as well 46-47

alternately and alternatively 48 although, though, but and however 49;
although and but not used together 511.1; although and in spite of 272
altogether and all together 50 always position 22.3, 24.2; in
imperatives 268.7; and ever 191,5; with progressive 472; with simple
past 457.4 am weak and strong form 616.3 a m (= in the morning) 579.3
American used for United States citizens and affairs 364 Note d
American-British differences 51; grammar 51.1; vocabulary 51.2; spelling
51.3; pronunciation 51.4; adjective forms used as adverbs 27.4; adverb
position 24.11; can't and mustn't 359.2; dates 152; have to and must
361.1; irregular verbs 304.3; letters 146.12; names of meals 347.2; noun
+ noun (e.g. a doll house) 386.6; use of subjunctive 567.2 among and
between 105.2; among meaning 'one of 105.4 amount with uncountables
333.4;

following article dropped 70.7 amused • very!much amused 410.4 analysis
plural 524.4 -ance, -ancy (suffixes) 445.2 and 52; + infinitive without
to 281.4; after try, wait, go etc 53; both... and 111; ellipsis (leaving
out words) after and 178; in numbers 389.10; weak and strong form 616.3;
with adjectives 16 Anglo- 445.1 angry preposition 449 annoyed by/with
410.5 another 54; + plural expression 532.6; another one 395.5; another
few weeks etc 54.2 another thing is (discourse marker) 157.11 ante-
(prefix) 445.1 anti- (prefix) 445.1

antique shop and antiques shop 312.9 anxious preposition 449; anxious to
284.1; anxious for ...to 291.3; with should 521.1 any 55

after superlatives 139.8 and any 0/55.7; and every 56; and not any 55.3;
and some 547 any... at all 55.6 any... but (= except) 116.1 any
different!good! use 57 any more and anymore 379 any!some or no article
67 any the worse! wiser etc 141.2 expressions with no preposition

451.2

hardly any 43.3

meaning ‘it doesn't matter which' etc

55.5

non-affirmative word 381 not any, no and none 376 with comparatives {any
older etc) 57 anybody and anyone 548; no

difference 548.1; anyone and any one 548.7; non-affirmative words 381;
position with adjectives 13.6; with else 183.1 anyhow (discourse marker)
157.7 anyone see anybody anything 548; anything else 183.1; anything
for... to 291.6; anything that 494.5; position with adjectives

13.6

anyway (discourse marker) 157.7 anywhere 548; position with

adjectives 13.6; anywhere else 183.1 apart from (discourse marker)

157.12; apart from, besides and except 102

apologies 545.7 apologise preposition 449 apostrophe 479; in plurals of
abbreviations 2.4 apparently (discourse marker) 157.16 appear link verb
58.1; and seem 58.2; in negative sentences 369.4; meaning 'come into
sight' 58.3; appear to 282; non-progressive verb 471.2; it appears so
536.1; structure with there

587.5

appendix plural 524.4 appreciate .. .ing 296.1; with preparatory it
(e.g. I would appreciate it if you ...) 447.3 approach no following
preposition

451.1

Arab, Arabic and Arabian 364 Note e arch- (prefix) 445.1 are weak and
strong form 616.3 areas 389.19

aren't I? 143.4 Note 2, 488.1 arise and rise 59

arms plural with no singular 524.7 around, round and about 60 arrange to
282; arrange for ...to 291.7 arrive at/in 81.5

arrived active past participle 409.4 arse (taboo word / swearword) 575
arsehole (taboo word / swearword) 575 art older English form of are 392
articles {a fan and the) 61-70 basic information 62-63 a and an: the
difference 65.7 a and one in numbers 389.11 a with half 231.4 days,
months and seasons 70.9

dropped after amount/number of 70.7; after both and all 70.5; after kind
of etc 70.6; in noun + noun compounds 70.4; after possessive ‘s 70.3; in
advertisements, instructions etc 1, 70.19; in double expressions

70.2

exclamations {Whata...!) 70.13 illnesses 70.14 in bed etc 70.1 jobs and
positions 70.12 man and woman 70.8 measurements {by the kilo etc) 70.16
musical instruments 70.10 newspapers and magazines 70.18 no article with
plurals and uncountables 66 parts of the body 70.15 place names 70.17
radio, cinema, theatre and television

70.11

some/any or no article 67 special rules and exceptions 70 talking in
general 68 the accused, the blind, the British etc 17

the instead of possessive (e.g. hit him on the arm) 441.5 the older...,
the happier etc 139.5 the with half 231.3 the with -ing forms (e.g. the
opening of Parliament) 295.3 the with superlatives 141.6 70 miles an
hour etc 389.20 see also a/an, the as (reason) as, because, since and
for 72 as (similarity, function) and like 326 + infinitive without to
281.4 + will or present tense with future meaning 580.2 after see,
describe etc 607.2 as... as 136 as .. .ing 411.6 as agreed etc 177.11 as
and than as subjects, objects and complements 581 as and that not used
together 511.1 as, like and how 252.3 as me, as I do etc 136.4, 429.2
as, than and that 139.1 cold as it was etc 71 ellipsis (leaving out
words) after as

177.7

not used after seem 507.5 replacing subjects, objects and complements
(e.g. as happened yesterday, as follows, as was agreed, as you know)
326.5, 581 verb before subject after as 302.5 weak and strong form 616.3
word order in as good a voice etc 14 as (time) as, when and while 73

as a matter of fact 157.20 as a result 157.14 as ever 191.2

as far as 602.3; as far as... is concerned 157.1 as for 157.1 as I was
saying 157.9 as if 74; feel as j/202.3; it looks asif...

446.5 as it were 567.4

as long as 75; meaning ‘on condition that' 263

as much/many 357.6; as much as (emphatic use) 136.6 as regards 157.1 as
soon as + present with future meaning 580.2; + simple past or past
perfect 424.1 as such 76

as though 74; feel as though 202.3; it looks as though 446.5 as usual 77

as well position 46.1; may (might as well 343; as well, also and too
46-47 as well as 78; + singular verb 532.2; as well as that 157.11 ask
79; + object + infinitive 277.1, 283; + subjunctive 567.2; ask to 282;
ask for... to 291.7; passive structure (/ was asked to) 418.1; with one
and two objects 610.7 asleep position 12.3; asleep and sleeping 86 ass
(taboo word / swearword) 575 asshole (taboo word / swearword) 575
astonish non-progressive verb 471.2 at after verbs 80; at... age 32; at
and to 80; at night 70.1; at no time + inversion (auxiliary before
subject) 302.7; at, on and in (place) 81; (time) 82; at/on weekends
312.9; at Philip's, at the Smiths' etc 249.1; at school, university etc
70.1; weak and strong form 616.3 at all 83

at any rate (discourse marker) 157.7 at first and first 84 at last,
finally, in the end and at the end 204

at least 318.6; discourse marker

157.7,16 at once 393 at which point 498.5 ate AmE pronunciation 304.3
-ate (suffix) 445.6 athletics singular, no plural 524.3 -ation (suffix)
445.2 attempt + -ing form or infinitive

299.11 Attorney General 13.1 attributive position of adjectives 12.1
authoress 222.4 auto- (prefix) 445.1 autumn with or without the 70.9
auxiliary verbs 85; dropping words after auxiliaries 181; stressed for
emphasis 184.2 available position after noun (e.g. the tickets
available) 13.2, 498.10 avoid...ing 296.1 await 612

awake (adjective) position 12.3; and waking 86 awake (verb), wake and
(a)waken 86 aware of not followed by that 453.1

back and again 87 backward(s) 614 bacterium plural 524.4 bad preposition
449; worse, worst

137.2

badly comparative and superlative 138 baggage uncountable 148.3 balls
(taboo word / swearword) 575 bank + singular or plural verb/ pronoun
526.1 barracks singular and plural the same

524.3

basis plural 524.4

bath and bathe 88

baths pronunciation 525.4

BBC + singular or plural verb/pronoun

526.1

BC and AD 152.3

be 89-92; and have 92; be born 108; be gone 229; contractions [he's,
isn't etc) 143; do be, don't be 90, 268.4; I am to ... etc 91; left out
in advertisements, instructions etc 1; left out in news headlines 240;
perfect auxiliary in older English 455.1; progressive forms (/ am being
etc) 89; subjunctive (/ be, I were etc) 567.3; weak and strong form
616.3; with ages 32 be + infinitive (/ am to etc) 91; was to have been
etc 288.2; if... was/were to

261.2 be able 3

be committed + -ing form or infinitive

299.11 be going to 213 be supposed to 572 be sure and 53.1 be that as it
may 567.4 be used to .. .ing 605 bear (verb) 108.2; (can't) bear + -ing
form or infinitive 299.11 beat and win 93 because 94; and because of
94.1; because and so not used together 511.1; because, as, since and/or
72; just because..., it doesn't mean 94.3 become, get, go, grow etc 128

bed expressions without article 70.1 been weak and strong form 616.3;

meaning 'come' or 'gone' 95 before (adverb) 96; and ago 33.4; and ever
191.4; before, first and before that 96.3; with past perfect 97.3; with
present perfect 455.5 before (conjunction and preposition) 97-98; +
present with future meaning 580.2; before .. .ing 411.6; before and in
front of 98; before and until 602.7 beg to 282; + object + infinitive
283 begin + -ing form or infinitive 299.10; begin and start 99; to begin
with

157.10

believe non-progressive verb 471.2; + object + to be 607.3; believe sol
not 539; in negative sentences 369; he is believed to be 418.2;
preposition 449; so I believe 539.3 belong non-progressive verb 471.2;

preposition 449 beloved pronunciation 18 below, under, underneath and
beneath 100 bend active or passive meaning 609.2 beneath, below, under
and underneath 100

beside and besides 101; besides (discourse marker) 157.11; besides_{t}
except and apart from 102 bet 103; + present with future meaning 103.2;
with two objects 610.1 better 137.2; and rather 104.2; had better 230;
meaning ‘recovered'

104.1; quite better 489.3 between and among 105; between... to 312.7;
between you and I etc 312.6,

429.1 bl- (prefix) 445.1 bicycle by bicycle 70.1 big, large and great
106 billiards singular, no plural 524.3 billion 389.14; and billions
389.15 binoculars plural with no singular

524.7

bit 430.1; a bit 107; quite a bit 489.4 bitch (taboo word / swearword)
575 blast (taboo word / swearword) 575 blessed pronunciation 18 blind
the blind 17.1 bloody position 12.2 blue with cold etc 449 boat by boat
70.1; on!in a boat 81.4 bollocks (taboo word / swearword) 575 bored and
boring etc 409.2 born and borne 108 borrow and lend 109

both 110; and all 35.1; and both of 110.2; both ... and 111; following
article dropped 70.5 bread uncountable 148.3 break active or passive
meaning 609.2 bride and bridegroom 222.4 briefly 157.21

bring and take 112; bring with two objects 610.1 bring up and educate
113 Brit 364 Note b

Britain, the United Kingdom, the British Isles and England 114 British
the British 17.2 British and American English 51; see also
American-British differences Briton 364 Note b broad anduwfell5 broadly
speaking 157.12 buffalo plural 523.3 bugger (taboo word / swearword) 575
bunch 430.4

burst out crying!laughing 296.1 bus by bus 70.1; on a bus 81.4 but
(co-ordinating conjunction) 510.2; but, although, though and however 49;
but and although not used together 511.1; dropping words after but 178;
may!might... but 342; weak and strong form 616.3 but meaning 'except*
116; + infinitive without to 281.4; me_{%} him etc after but 429.2; next
but one, last but two etc 116.1 but meaning 'only' 116.4 buy with two
objects 610.1 by and with (method, tools etc) 119; in passive 413;
written! composed etc by 450; by or other prepositions after past
participles 410.5; by the kilo etc

70.16

by (place) and near 118 by (time) 117; and until 602.6 by all/any/no
means 349.2 by and large 157.12 by car, bus etc 70.1 by far with
superlatives 140.3 by myself etc 493.6 by the time that 117.1 by the way
157.8 Bye and Bye-bye 545.2

cactus plural 524.4 calculations in speech 389.22-23 calf plural 524.1

call 120; passive (e.g. she was called stupid} 419; call back 87.5
camped active past participle 409.4 can and could 121-5 ability 122

can! could always 123.4 can!could and may!might 345

can have done in questions 359.4

can or will be able 123.1

can see, hear etc 125; can speak, play

123.3

can't and may!might not 339.4 can't and mustn't 359.2 can't have done
359.4 could and was able to etc 122.5,123.2 could and was allowed to etc
124.3 could as a less definite form of can

122.6

could have done 122.7, 123.5, 259.2 could in indirect speech 275.3,
278.3 could meaning 'would be able to'

122.6, 258.6 could meaning ‘would be allowed to'

124.4

could making questions etc less direct 436.4 interpersonal uses
(permission, requests, offers, suggestions, criticisms etc) 124 weak and
strong form 616.3 can't bear + -ing form or infinitive

299.11 can't help 126 can't seem to 507.4 can't stand ...ing 296.1
capital letters 556; after colons 474.4; national adjectives (Italian
etc) 364; Northern etc 172 car by car 70.1

care to 282; take care (of), care (about) and care for 127 careful to
284.2

carry not followed by indirect object

610.6

case in some etc cases 157.12; in any case 157.11; in case 271 cattle
plural with no singular 524.7 causative structures with get 224; with
have 238; with make 335 cause + object + infinitive 283 cent 389.17
cent(i)- (prefix) 445.1 -centric (suffix) 445.4 centuries numbering
389.8 certain + -ing form or infinitive 299.15 certainly position 24.3;
as discourse marker 157.5; certainly and surely

573.1

chairman and chairperson 222.5 chance uncountable use 149.2 change
active or passive meaning 609.1; uncountable use 149.2 changes become,
get, go, grow etc 128;

present progressive 464.4, 466.2 changes in English 312 Cheers
545.2,12,19 chess uncountable 148.3 chewing gum uncountable 148.3 child
plural 524.2

Chinese singular and plural the same

524.3

choir + singular or plural 526.1 choose to 282; she was chosen to be

418.1

Christ (taboo word / swearword) 575 Christmas prepositions 82.4 church
expressions without article 70.1 cinema preposition 450; the cinema

70.11

city and town 129 class + singular or plural 526.1 classic and classical
254.3 classical names English versions 362.2 clause inside clause 515.1
clean adjective and adverb 27.2 cleft sentences with if 131; with what
130

clever preposition 449

dose(d) and shut 132

cloth and clothes 133

clothes plural with no singular 524.7

club + singular or plural 526.1

co- (prefix) 445.1

cock (taboo word / swearword) 575 cold be cold 92,1

collapsed active past participle 409.3 collective nouns singular or
plural

526.1

college expressions without article

70.1

collocations 255

colons 474; in news headlines 240.2 colour expressions with no
preposition 451.8 colour use of be 92.2 combat(t)ing etc spelling 562.7
come and go 134; come.. .ing 228.2; come and 53.2; come fora walk, swim
etc 227; come from 134.5; come to (= ‘arrive at') 134.5; come to realise
etc

128.5

come true/right 128.5 comic and comical 254.3 command + object +
infinitive 283 commando plural 523.3 commas 476; after subordinate
clauses 510.4; in numbers 389.10; in relative clauses 495.2; with
adjectives 15.6 commentaries tenses 465.2; words left out 1.3

committed + -ing form or infinitive

299.11

committee + singular or plural 526.1 common for ...to 291.4 comparatives
and superlatives 135, 137-141

adjectives (formation) 137 adverbs (formation) 138 anylno older etc 57.1
ever after comparatives/superlatives

191.2

fatter and fatter, more and more slowly etc 139.4 more replacing -er
312.9 much, far etc with comparatives and superlatives 140 prepositions
with superlatives {the happiest man in the world etc) 139.7 superlative
+ infinitive 284.3 superlative + relative clause with that

494.5

superlative with or without the 141.6 tenses after this is the best etc
591 the difference between comparatives and superlatives 139.2*3 the
older..., the happier... etc

139.5

using comparatives and superlatives 139-141

word order with complement 13.5 comparison 135-141; as ... as 136;
comparative and superlative adjectives and adverbs 137-141; structures
135; see also comparatives and superlatives compel + object + infinitive
283 complementation what can follow an adjective? 19; what can follow a
noun? 384; what can follow a verb? 606

completely position 24.4 compound adjectives with participles (e.g
quick-growing, home-made) 410.1 compound nouns plurals 524.6 concentrate
not ‘concentrate oneself

493.9

concern non-progressive verb 471.2 concerned position and meaning

410.3

concerto plural 523.3 conclusion in conclusion 157.21 conditional
structures see if conditional verb forms see would confused and
confusing etc 409.2 congratulate and congratulations preposition 449
congratulations no singular 524.7,

545.4

conjunctions 510-11; prepositions before conjunctions (e.g. the question
of whether...) 453 consent structures 298.2 consequently (discourse
marker) 157.14 consider ...ing 296.1; consider + object + to be 607.3;
he was considered a genius etc 419; it is considered to be etc 418.2

consist non-progressive verb 471.2 contain non-progressive verb 471.2
contemplate .. .ing 296.1 contents plural with no singular 524.7

continual(ly) and continuously) 142; continually with progressive form
472

continue + -ing form or infinitive

299.11

continuous see progressive contractions 143

contrary and opposite 144.2; on the contrary 157.6; on the contrary and
on the other hand 144.1 contrastive emphasis 184.1 control meaning 145
conversation countable or uncountable 148.6 co-ordinating conjunctions
510.2 corpus plural 524.4 correctness 309

correspondence (letters etc) 146-147 cost with two objects 610.1 costly
adjective, not adverb 27.1 could see can countable and uncountable nouns
148-149; a/an with uncountables 149.4; plural uncountables 149.5
counter- (prefix) 445.1 counting see numbers country countable and
uncountable uses 150; the country 69.4 couple a couple of... + plural
verb

526.2

course of course 390

court martial 13.1; plural 524.6

covered in 410.5

cowardly adjective, not adverb 27.1 crack active or passive meaning
609.2 craft singular and plural the same

524.3

crap (taboo word / swearword) 575 crash preposition 449 crew plural with
no singular 524.7 crisis plural 524.4 criterion plural 524.4 crooked
pronunciation 18 crossroads singular and plural the same 524.3 cubic
metre etc 389.19 cunt (taboo word / swearword) 575 cursed pronunciation
18 customs plural with no singular 524.7 cyber- (prefix) 445.1

daily adjective and adverb 27.1 damn (taboo word I swearword) 575
'dangling' (misrelated) participles 411.4 dare 151; I dare say 151.3
dash (punctuation mark) 477 data singular or plural 524.3, 312.7 dates
152; in letters 146.2 day by day 70.1; the day we met etc

498.6

days of the week expressions with no preposition 451.3 de- (prefix)
445.1

dead adjective and adverb 27.2; dead, died and death 153; the dead 17.1
dead and deadly 27.2 deadly adjective, not adverb 27.1 deaf the deaf
17.1 deal a great deal 333.4 decide to 282; it was decided to 417.2
decimals 389.1-3 declarative questions (e.g. You're working late?) 481
deep position after measurement nouns 13.4 deer singular and plural the
same

524.3

defining (relative clauses) see identifying definitely position 24.3
delay ...mg296.1 delighted for ... to 291.3 demonstratives {this, that,
these, those) 589-590 deny non-progressive verb 471.2;

deny.. .ing 296.1; I deny 466.4 depend non-progressive verb 471.2;

depend!dependent preposition 449 describe structure with as 607.2; with
two objects 610.6 descriptive and prescriptive rules 309.4 deserve +
-ing form with passive meaning 296.3; non-progressive verb

471.2

despite this/that 157.3 details preposition 449 determiners {the, my,
some, either etc) 154; with •ing form (e.g. the opening of Parliament;
my smoking) 295.3; dropping words after determiners

180.2

detest ...ing296.1

developed active past participle 409.3

diagnosis plural 524.4

dialects and standard English 308,

309.2

dice singular and plural the same

524.3

dick (taboo word / swearword) 575 die preposition 449 died, dead and
death 153 difference uncountable use 149.2;

difference between 105.3 different from/to/than 155.2; and other 54.5;
any!no different 155.1; word order with complement 13.5 difficult word
order with complement 13.5; difficult to please etc 284.4 difficulty
preposition 449; have difficulty in .. .ing 149.2 dime 389.17 dinner,
lunch and supper 347 direct adjective and adverb 27.2 direct and
indirect objects 610 direct and indirect speech 274.1; see also indirect
speech direct speech reporting verbs and word order 156; commas and
colons

474.6, 476.9; quotation marks 478.1 dis- (prefix) 445.1

disagree non-progressive verb 471.2

disappointed preposition 449

discourse markers 157

discuss no following preposition 451.1

discussion preposition 449

dislike non-progressive verb 471.2;

+ (object +) -ing form 296.1,2 distributive plural (e.g. six people lost
their lives) 530 dive AmE forms 304.3 divide prepositions 449; between/
among 105.3 divorce and get divorced 337 do 158-161

auxiliary verb 159; in emphatic imperatives (e.g. Do sit down.) 268.2;
in negatives 367-371; in questions 482; in question tags 487-8; in short
answers 517 do and make 160.3 do .. .ing 160 general-purpose verb 160 so
do I etc 541 substitute verb 161 weak and strong form 616.3 with be in
emphatic imperatives

268.4 with have 237, 239 do so/it/that 162 do you mind .. .1 351.1
doctor 363.2,3

does weak and strong form 616.3 dogged pronunciation 18 dollar 389.17

donate not followed by indirect object

610.6

don't I'm_{t} Vve etc (contractions) 143 don't be in negative
imperatives 268.4 don't mention it 545.19 double negatives 370; in
dialects 309.2; in expressions of doubt 261.8,

370.7

doubling consonants (e.g. big -> bigger) 562 doubt (noun) no doubt 377
doubt (verb) structures 163; nonprogressive verb 471.2; if in doubt

261.6

down and up {down! up the road etc) 603

dozen and dozens 389.15 Dr 363.3

draughts singular, no plural 524.3 dream preposition 449 dress (noun)
164.1 dress (verb) 164.2,3; dress, not dress oneself 493.9; dress(ed)
preposition 449

drinking common expressions 545.12

drive preposition 449

dropping words see ellipsis

drown and be drowned 165

<<main-42.xhtml>>

drunken 304.3

due to and owing to 166

duke and duchess 222.4

during and for 167; and in 168

Dutch the Dutch 17.2

e- (prefix) 445.1

each 169; each of 169.2; and every 170; expressions with no preposition
451.2; followed by he!she or they 169.3; position 169.4 each other / one
another 171; and -selves 171.4 eager for ...to 291.3 early adjective and
adverb 27.1; (adverb) comparative and superlative 138; early, soon and
quickly 550 earth who on earth etc 624 easily with superlatives 140.3
east and eastern etc 172; capital letters

172.3

Easter prepositions 82.4 easy adjective and adverb 27.2;

(adverb) comparative and superlative 138; easy for...to 291.4; easy to
please etc 284.4; word order with complement 13.5 echo plural 523.3 echo
questions 483 eco- (prefix) 445.1 economic and economical 254.3 -ed
(suffix) 445.4; -ed and -ing forms (participles) 408-411; pronunciation
421, 18 educate and bring up 113 -ee (suffix) 445.2 efficient and
effective 173 e.g. (= for example) 157.13 either (adverb) position 24.6;
either, also_{t} as well and too in negative clauses 47; not... either,
neither and nor 374

either (determiner) 174; either of 174.2; and either one 395.5; meaning
‘each^{1} 174.5 either... or 175 elder and eldest 176; position 12.2
elect she was elected President etc 419 electric and electrical 254.3
elf plural 524.1

ellipsis (leaving out words) 177-182 after adjectives 180.1 after and,
but and or 178

after as and than 177.7 after auxiliary verbs 181 after conjunctions
177.11 after determiners 180.2 after i/261.6

after question words 177.8 at the beginning of a sentence 179 before
question tags 488.8 comprehension problems 515.3,4 dropping j/261.4,5
dropping prepositions 451 dropping prepositions before that

453.1,2 dropping that 584 dropping the after all 36.5 dropping the after
both 70.5 in advertisements, instructions etc 1 in headlines 240.1

in infinitives (e.g. I don't want to) 182 in noun phrases 180 in replies
177.1 object relative pronoun 495.4 subject relative pronoun 498.17 else
183; elsewhere 183.6 emails 147; words left out 1 embedding (clause
inside clause) 515 emphasis 184; emotive and contrastive

184.1

emphatic imperatives 268.2

en- (prefix) 445.1

-en (suffix) 445.6

-ence, -ency (suffixes) 445.2

encourage + object + infinitive 283

end and finish (verbs) 185

end at/in the end 204; either end 174.5

endure .. .ing 296.1

end-weight 512.4

England, Britain, the United Kingdom and the British isles 114 England
(football team) + plural 526.1 English the English 17.2, 364 English
(the language) uncountable

149.4

enjoy 186; enjoy... ing 296.1; Enjoy (yourself)! 545.9 enough 187;
enough of 187.4; + for... to 291.8; enough to after adjective

284.4

enter preposition 449; no following preposition 451.1 entitled
structures 298.2 equipment uncountable 148.3 -er (suffix) 445.2 escape
...ing296.1 escaped active past participle 409.3 -ese (suffix) 445.3
Eskimo plural 523.3 especially) and specialty) 188 -ess (suffix) 445.2

essential + subjunctive 567.2; + for...

to 291.4 -ette (suffix) 445.2

Euro- (prefix) 445.1

even 189; and also 189.3; position 24.6;

with comparatives 140.1 even if/though 189.4 even now 189.5 even so
189.5 eventual(ly) 190

ever 191; after superlatives 139.8; and always 191.5; and before 191.4;
if ever 261.6; non-affirmative word 381; position 24.2; who ever etc
624; with present perfect 455.5; with simple past 457.4; ever after
191.5; ever before 191.4; ever since 191.5 ever so/such 192

every 193; and all 39; and any 56; and each 170; every one (of) 193.2,3;
every ... but 116.1; every day and all day etc 39.4; expressions with no
preposition 451.2; followed by he!she or they 193.5 every few days etc
193.6 every now and then 193.10 every other 193.9 every single 193.9
every so often 193.10 everybody and everyone 548.1; no difference 548.1;
+ singular verb 548.3; and all 38; followed by he!she or they 193.7;
position with adjectives 13.6; question tags 488.5; with else

183.1

everyday and every day 193.8 everyone 548; + singular verb 548.3; and
all 38; and everybody 548.1; and every one 548.7; followed by he! she or
they 193.7; position with adjectives 13.6; question tags 488.5
everything 548; + singular verb 193.7; and all 38; everything that
494.5; position with adjectives 13.6; question tags 488.5 everywhere
548; + singular verb 193.7;

position with adjectives 13.6 ex- (prefix) 445.1

example of 449; for example 157.13 except structures 194; + infinitive
without to 281.4; except for 194, 157.12; and without 194.6; except,
besides and apart from 102; me, him etc after except 429.2 excited by
/about 410.5; excited and exciting etc 409.2 exclamation mark 473
exclamations 195; articles (Whata.../) 70.13 excuse ...mg296.1 Excuse me
545.6,7

expect (+ object) + infinitive 282-283; expect, hope, wait and look
forward 196; in negative sentences 369.4; expect so!not 539

experience countable or uncountable 148.6; and experiment 197 explain
structures 198; passive structures 415; preposition 449 extent to some
extent etc 157.12 extra- (prefix) 445.1

face ...mg296.1

facing, opposite and in front of 402 fact in fact, as a matter of fact
(discourse markers) 157.20; the fact that 583.3 faded active past
participle 409.3,4 fail to ... 282

fair adjective and adverb 27.2 fairly, quite, rather and pretty 199 fall
ill / asleep / in love 128.8 fallen active past participle 409.3 family
+ singular or plural 526.1 fancy ...mg296.1 far (adjective) 200.4 far
(adverb) and a long way 200 far before too 595.3; before

comparatives and superlatives 140 farm on a farm 81.7 fart (taboo word /
swearword) 575 farther and farther 201 fast adjective and adverb 27.2;

(adverb] comparative and superlative 138

fear and be afraid 28 feel 202; + object + infinitive without to 281.2;
+ object + to be 607.3; can feel 125.1; feel as iff though 202.3; feel
like 202.3,4; feel like.. .ing 296.1; / feel (discourse marker) 157.16;
it was felt that 417.1; link verb 202.1-3; ordinary verb: meanings and
structures 202.5-7; present tenses 466.7; progressive and
non-progressive uses 471.3; there are felt to be 418.4; without -self
493.9 female and feminine 203 fetch, look for and look after 331.4 few,
a few and (a) little 329; few of 329.2; the few... that 494J5; quite a
few 489.4 fewer and less 320.1; fewer of 320.2 fewest and least 318
fight preposition 449 fill in/out 312.9 filled with 410.5

finally (discourse marker) 157.10; and after all 31.2; finally, at last
and inf at the end 204 find + object + .. .ing 411.7; + object + to be
607.4 find and found 304.2 find out and know 313.5 fine adjective and
adverb 27.2 finish .. .ing 296.1; finish and end 185 finished be! have
finished 205; meaning ‘ready' 205; active past participle 409.4
finished-time words not normally used with present perfect 456.2,457.5
fireman 222.5

firm + singular or plural 526.1 first (adverb) and at first 84; and
before

96.3

first and one, second and two etc 389.7; tenses after this is the first
etc 591; the first etc to 284.3; word order with complement 13.5 first
floor etc 389.9 first(ly), first of all (discourse markers)

157.10

fish singular and plural the same 524.3 fit (adjective) + infinitive
284.2 fit non-progressive verb 471.2; AmE forms 304.3; fit and suit 206;
no passive 412.4 fixed expressions 255 flat adjective and adverb 27.2
flock 430.4

floors first floor etc 389.9 flow and fly 304.2 flu uncountable 148.7
fly and flow 304.2 focus(s)ing etc spelling 562.7 follow can follow
125.3 foot (measure) 389.18; six foot!feet etc

389.15

foot on foot 70.1; irregular plural 524.2 for ... to 291; after enough
291.8; after something anybody etc 291.6; after too 291.8; after verbs
291.7; for there to be 291.10 for in news headlines 240.2 for
purpose/cause 207; for.. Jng after nouns (e.g. a machine for cutting)
207.2,297.2; for, as, because and since 72

for (time), since, in and from 208; for and ago 33.3; and during 167;
dropped in time expressions 451.7; with present perfect progressive
458.5; present with future meaning after Jbr 208.1 for weak and strong
form 616.3 for a long time and long 330 for example, for instance 157.13
for one thing, for another thing (discourse markers) 157.10 forbid +
object + infinitive 283; + -ing form or infinitive 299.4 force + object
+ infinitive 283 fore- (prefix) 445.1 forever 191.5; with progressive
form 472

forget + -ing form or infinitive 299.1;

and leave 209 forgive .. .ing 296.1

formal and informal language 311; in letters and emails 146-147 former
the former 17.3 formula plural 524.4 forward(s) 614 found and find 304.2
fractions 389.1-3 frankly (discourse marker) 157.18 free adjective and
adverb 27.2; and freely 27.2 French the French 17.2, 364 frequently
position 22.3, 24.2 friendly adjective, not adverb 27.1 frightened by/of
410.5; very frightened

410.4

from, in, for and since (time) 208 from weak and strong form 616.3 from
my point of view and in my opinion 434 front in front of facing and
opposite 402; in the front of 402.3 fronting 513 fruit uncountable 148.5
fuck (taboo word / swearword) 575;

what the fuck etc 624 -ful (suffix) 445.2,4 full stops 473; in numbers
389.1,10;

not used in abbreviations 2.1 fun and funny 210 funds plural with no
singular 524.7 fungus plural 524.4 furniture uncountable 148.3 further
and farther 201 furthermore 157.11 future 211-221

future forms in polite instructions etc (e.g. You'll need to ...) 436.3
future in the past 221 future perfect 219 future progressive 220 going
to 213 I am to ... 91

present forms or willlshall? 216 present progressive 214 present
progressive or going to 214.2 shall in legal documents etc 218.6 simple
present 215 will and shall 212; interpersonal uses

217

will and shall, going to and present progressive (advanced points) 218

gallon BrE and AmE 389.18 game and play 432.1 gather I gather that 243
gender (references to males and females) 222 general in general
(discourse marker) 157.12

genitive see possessive geo- (prefix) 445.1

geographical names article use 70.17 gerunds 293-300; see also -ing
forms get structures and meanings 223-224; AmE forms 304.3; get + object
+ infinitive 283; get and go (movement) 225; get, become, go, grow etc
128; have got 237, 239; I got instead of I've got 312.8; passive
auxiliary {get caught etc) 223.5; passive imperatives (e.g. get
vaccinated) 268.3; with two objects 610.1 get back to 599.5 get dressed,
drowned, lost, married etc 223.4 get married/divorced 337 get on with
599.5 get round to .. .mg 298.2 get used to 605.3

give with two objects 610.1; in passive 415; with action nouns [give a
cry etc) 226; give it a push etc 598.2 give up ...mg296.1 glass
(uncountable) and a glass 148.4 glasses plural with no singular 524.7 go
+ infinitive or -ing form 296.4; go ...ing 228; go and 53.2; go and come
134; go and get (movement) 225; go, become, get, grow etc 128; go for a
walk, swim etc 227, 598.2 go (noun) a go 598.1 go on + -mg form or
infinitive 299.2 God (taboo word / swearword) 575 God Almighty word
order 13.1; God bless you 567.4; God save the Queen

567.4

going to (future auxiliary) 213, 216,

218

gold and golden 386.4 gone active past participle 409.4; be gone 229
gonna (= going to) 213.4, 308.4 good preposition 449; better, best
137.2; a good two hours etc 532.6; any I no good 57; + infinitive 284.4;
and well 617.1; good at.. .ing 297.1; good for... to 291.4; it's no
good.. .ing 295.5 good-looking comparative/ superlative 137.4 Good
morning etc 545.2; Goodbye

545.2

goods plural with no singular 524.7 goose plural 524.2 got have got 237,
239; I got instead of fve got 312.8; see also have gotta (= got to)
239.4, 308.4 gotten 304.3

government + singular or plural 526.1 gradable adjectives 489.1 granted
(discourse marker) 157.5 grape(s) countable 148.5 grateful and thankful
582 great big and large 106

greetings 545.2,4

groceries plural with no singular 524.7 ground floor etc 389.9 group +
singular or plural 526.1,2 group- and piece-words 430 grow, become, get,
go etc 128 grown up active past participle 409.3,4 guess can guess
125.2; guess so/not 539; I guess (discourse marker) 157.16

had weak and strong form 616.3 had better 230; had better, should and
ought 230.1; in indirect speech 278.3 had I meaning 'if I had* etc 261.5
had rather obsolete form 491.3 had to do and must have done 361.3 hair
(uncountable) and a hair 148.5 half 231; half of 231.1; half of + plural
verb 526.2; half as ...as 136.7; half two (= half past two) 579.1;
halves

524.1

handicapped spelling 562.7; the handicapped 17.1 'hanging' (misrelated)
participles 411.4 happen to 232; after in case 271.2; in if-clauses
261.1; structure with there 587.2; happen in negative sentences

369.4

Happy birthday/New Year etc 545.4 happy to 284.1

hard adjective and adverb 27.2;

(adverb) comparative and superlative 138; hard and hardly 27.2; hard to
please 284.4 hardly position 24.4; inversion (auxiliary before subject)
302.7; hardly evertany etc 43.3; hardly, scarcely and no sooner 233;
question tags 487.4 has weak and strong form 616.3 hat in a hat 450

hate non-progressive verb 471.2; +

-ing form or infinitive 299.9; + object + infinitive 283 have 234-239

+ object + verb form 238 actions (have a bath, breakfast etc) 236, 598.2
auxiliary verb 235 contractions {Vve, hasn't etc) 143 don't have to,
needn't and mustn't

359.3, 360.4 have and be 92

have (got) possession, relationships etc 237

have (got) to 239; and must 361.1; future: have (got) to, will have to
and must 361.2 have or take (a bath, shower etc)

236.1

I got instead of I've got 312.8

not used in passive 412.4 question tags 488.6 weak and strong form 616.3
with or without do 237, 239 Have a good holiday/time/trip etc

545.9,10 have on (= be wearing) 164.3 he (personal pronoun) 428-429;
meaning ‘he or she' 222.2; he or she 222.2; he/she who 429.9; used for
animals 222.1; weak and strong form 616.3; see also personal pronouns
headlines 240

headquarters singular and plural

524.3

health uncountable 149.4 hear non-progressive verb 471.2; can hear
125.1; hear and listen (to) 241; hear something happen/happening/ done
242; I hear that... 243; make oneself heard 335.2; he was heard to
418.3; so I hear 539.3 Heaven forbid 567.4 heavy 'unmarked' use 350
height expressions with no preposition 451.8 height use of be 92.2 hell
(taboo word / swearword) 575;

why the hell etc 624 help (verb) 244; can't help (.. .ing) 126; help +
(object +) infinitive 281.2, 282, 283; he was helped to 418.3 her
(personal pronoun) 428-429; (possessive) 441; weak and strong form
616.3; see also personal pronouns; possessives herd 430.4

here and there 245; here comes... etc 303; here's + plural noun 532.4
Here you are 545.18 hero plural 523.3; and heroine 222.4 hers 442
herself 493 hesitate to 282

high adjective and adverb 27.2;

(adverb) comparative and superlative 138; high and highly 27.2; high and
tall 246; two metres high etc 13.4 high tea 347.1 high time 306.2

him (personal pronoun) 428-429; weak and strong form 616.3; see also
personal pronouns himself 493 hire, rent and let 247 his (e.g. his
house) 441; (e.g. it's his) 442; weak and strong form 616.3; see also
possessives historic and historical 254.3 holiday(s) 248;
questions/wishes about holidays 545.9,10 home 249; and house 249.2;

expressions without article 70.1 homeward(s) 614 honestly (discourse
marker) 157.18 -hood (suffix) 445.2 hope 250; + infinitive 282; +
present with future meaning 250.1; hope, expect, wait and look forward
196; hope for ...to 291.7; hope sol not 539; I was hoping, I had hoped
250.3; negative structures 250.2, 369.2 hopefully 251

hospital expressions without article

70.1

host and hostess 222.4 hot be hot 92.1 house and home 249.2 houses
pronunciation 525.4 hovercraft singular and plural the same 524.3 how
252; and how much 252.2; and the way 252.7; and what... like 253;
exclamations 195,252.4; how-clauses in sentences 252.6; how, like and as
252.3; how to 277.2; how, what and why 252.4; no matter how 378; special
word order with adjectives 14 how about...? 252.4 How are you? and How
do you do?

545.1,3 How dare you? 151.3 How do you know? 252.4 how else 183.1 how
ever 624 how far 252.5

how long? with present perfect 460.1; How long are you here for? and How
long have you been here for? 330.5 how much/many 252.5; and how 252.2
how often 252.5 how old 252.5

how on earth, the hell, the fuck etc 624 How should I know? etc 482.2
however, although, though and but 49; however (discourse marker) 157.3
however (conjunction) 625; and no matter how 378.2 hundred and a hundred
389.11; and hundreds 389.15 hungry be hungry 92.1 hurry without
-self493.9; hurry up and

53.2

hurt present tenses 466.7 hyper- (prefix) 445.1 hyphens 559 hypothesis
plural 524.4

I, me etc (personal pronouns) 428-429; after as 136.4; after but 116.2;
after than 139.6; I and me, she and her etc: the differences 428.2,429;
I in double objects (e.g. between you and I) 312.6,

429.1; / who 498.12; It is I who f It is me that 131.2; me in double
subjects (e.g. John and me went) 309.3; see also persona! pronouns I am
to 91

I beg your pardon 545.7 I dare say 151.3 1 don't know (discourse marker)
157.17 I feel (discourse marker) 157.16 I gather/hear/see/understand
that 243 I guess (discourse marker) 157.16 I know and I know it 313.6 I
mean (discourse marker) 348.4, 157.15-17 I reckon (discourse marker)
157.16 I should meaning 'If I were you, I should* 264.2 I suppose
(discourse marker) 157.16 I think (discourse marker) 157.16 I think I'll
(softening expression) 437.2 I told you so 540.2 I would meaning ‘If I
were you, I would* 264.2 -(i)an (suffix) 445.3 -ic and -ical (suffixes)
445.4;

differences 254.3 idea preposition 449; a good idea for... to 291.5; the
idea of.. .ing 297.1; uncountable use 149.2 identify structure with as
607.2 identifying and non-identifying relative clauses 495; 498.14; see
also relative structures idioms 255 if 256-264 basic structures:
ordinary tense use 257

basic structures: past tenses and would 258 basic structures: unreal
past situations 259 discourse marker showing concession 157.5 double
negative in sentences with if

261.8 even if 189.4

if... any 55.1; if... ever 191.1; if... happen to 261.1; if.. .mg411.6;
if... should 261.1; if... then 261.9; if... was/were to 261.2 if and in
case 271; and when 618; and whether 621 if I were you 264 if in indirect
questions 276.3 if it was! were not for 261.3 (/meaning ‘even if 261.10
leaving out z/261.4,5 other words with the same meaning 263

preparatory it (e.g. it will be a pity if)

446.5

sentences with if in indirect speech

278.5

structures in spoken English 262 various meanings 261.10-13 will in
(/-clause 260 with past participle (e.g. if asked)

411.6

if any, ever, necessary, in doubt etc

261.6

if not and unless 601.1,2

if only 265

if so/not 261.7

if you like 325.7

-ify (suffix) 445.6

ill position 12.3; and sick 266;

preposition 449 ill- (prefix) 445.1

illnesses usually uncountable 148.7;

with or without the 70.14 I'm, Vve, don't etc (contractions) 143 I'm
afraid (discourse marker) 157.16 im- (prefix) 445.1

imagine non-progressive verb 471.2; + (object +) -ing form 296.1,2;
imagine (that) 263; + sof not 539; in negative sentences 369 immediately
(conjunction) 267 imperatives 268; question tags 488.2;

structures with let 323 important + subjunctive 567.2; +for... to
291.2_{t}4; structure with should

521.1

impossible to 284.4; for...to 291.4 impressed preposition 449 in (place)
81; in and into 269; in and to 80; in, at and on 81; in bed_{t} hospital
etc 70.1

in (time) 82; in a month's time etc 82.6; in and during 168; and later
315; in, at and on 82; in, from, for and since 208

in addition 157.11; in addition to.. .ing

298.2

in any case (discourse marker)

157.7,11

in case and i/271; + happen to / should

271.2

in case of 271.4 in conclusion 157.21 in fact (discourse marker) 157.20
in front of, facing and opposite 402; in front of and before 98 in
general (discourse marker) 157.12 in most cases 157.12 in my opinion
157.16; and from my point of view 434 in my view 157.16 in order that
and so that 543 in order to 289 in other words 157.15 in particular
(discourse marker) 157.13 in short (discourse marker) 157*21 in some
cases 157.12 in spite of 272; in spite of.. .mg 411.6;

in spite of this! that 157.3 in the end, at the end, at last and finally
204 in the first etc place (discourse marker) 157.10 in the same way
(discourse marker) 157.4 in the way and on the way 615.5 in time and on
time 450, 593.3 in which case 498.5 in- (prefix) 445.1 inch 389.18
incidentally 157.8 inclined structures 298.2 include non-progressive
verb 471.2 increased active past participle 409.3 indeed 273

indefinite pronouns see somebody, anybody, you etc independence and
independent prepositions 449 indirect and direct objects 610 indirect
speech 274-8 I asked how old you are I were etc

278.2 infinitives 277 modal verbs 278.3 negative questions 278.6 past
use of must 359.5 questions and answers 276 reporting past tenses with
past or past perfect 278.1 reporting Shall I...? 278.4 sentences with
if278.5 tenses 275

with relative structures: somebody I know you'll like; a car that I
didn't know how fast it could go 498.15,16 without reporting verbs 278.9
word order with what, which and who 278.7 infinitives 279-292 active and
passive infinitive with similar meaning 287 after adjectives 284 after
easy, difficult, impossible etc

284.4

after nouns and pronouns 285 after relatives (e.g. a garden in which to
play) 498.13 after superlatives (e.g. the youngest person to) 141.5,
284.3 after verbs 282; after verb + object 283 for... to 291 forms 280

future meaning (e.g. the life to come)

285.6

in indirect speech 277 in news headlines 240.2 infinitive or -ing form
293.3; after verbs 296.4; after way 615.3; special cases 299 infinitive
without to 281; aften as... as 136.9; but U6.3; except 194.5; help 244;
let 322; make 335; rather than 491.1; why 628.3; would rather

491.2

perfect infinitive (e.g. to have left) 288 position of prepositions
(e.g. to look at) 452

progressive, perfect, passive and negative infinitives 280 purpose (e.g.
I sat down to rest) 289 split infinitive 280.7 structure with
preparatory it 446-447 subject, object or complement 290 to 280.6; used
instead of whole infinitive 182 who to ..what to ... etc 286 informal
and formal language 311 information structure 512; reasons for using
passives 414.2-4 information uncountable 148.3 -ing forms 408-11,293-300

a waiting room, a waiting train 294 after mind 351.3; after nouns and
adjectives 297; after prepositions 298, 454; after verbs 296 as
subjects, objects or complements 295

gerunds 293-300 golcome...ing 228 in progressive verbs: see progressive
-ing form or infinitive 293.3; after verbs 296.4; after way 615.3;
special cases 299 it as preparatory subject or object

295.5

passive meaning (e.g. it needs cleaning) 296.3 perfect, passive and
negative -ing forms 293.2 present participles 408-411, 300 terminology
293 to .. .ing 298.2

with determiner (e.g. the opening of Parliament, my smoking) 295.3 with
object (e.g. smoking cigarettes)

295.2

-ing (suffix) 445.2 initials names of organisations 2 insist +
subjunctive 567.2; preposition 449

instance Jbr instance 157.13 instant the instant (that) 267 instead
301.3; instead o/301.1,2; instead of.. .ing 411.6; instead of and
without 301.2 instruct + object + infinitive 283 instructions use of
tenses 465; words left out 1.1 intend + object + infinitive 283; + -ing
form or infinitive 299.11; in negative sentences 369.4 inter- (prefix)
445.1 interested) preposition 449; + -ing form or infinitive 299.16;
interested and interesting etc 409.2 international English 308.7
interrogative see questions; interrogative pronouns see who, what which
into and in 269

intonation 555; in question tags 487.5;

in relative clauses 495.2 introductions 545.1 inversion verb before
subject 302-303;

in older English 392 inverted commas see quotation marks invitations
545.15 invite + object + infinitive 283 involve non-progressive verb
471.2;

involve .. .ing 296.1 involved position and meaning 410.3 Irish the
Irish 17.2, 364 irregular verbs list of common examples 304 is weak and
strong form 616.3 -ise/ize (suffix) 445.6; -ise or -ize 558 -ish
(suffix) 445.4 -ism (suffix) 445.2 -1st (suffix) 445.3

it personal pronoun 428-429; and this! that (things that have just been
mentioned) 590; referring to nothing 428.7; referring to the situation
428.7; referring to time, weather, temperature and distances 428.8; used
to identify (e.g. It's John) 428.9; it was me that / it was I who etc
429.3; it was my secretary who etc (cleft sentences) 131; it's
impossible for... to etc 291.4; preparatory subject and object 446-447;
see also preparatory it it doesn't matter and no matter 378.3 it is the
first/last etc tenses 591 it is true (discourse marker) 157.5 item of
information etc 430.1 its 441; and it's 305 it's ... since tenses 522.2
it's time 306 itself 493 -ity (suffix) 445.2 -ive (suffix) 445.4 -ize
(suffix) 445.6; and -ise 558

Japanese singular and plural the same

524.3

jeans plural with no singular 524.7 Jesus (taboo word / swearword) 575

journey (countable) and travel (uncountable) 148.3; have!did you have a
good Journey 545.9; journey, travel, trip and voyage 597 jury -i-
singular or plural 526.1 just adjective and adverb 27.2; just and justly
27.2; just (adverb): meanings and tenses 307; position 24.6, 25; used
for emphasis 184.3; just as! when 73.3; just as (discourse marker)

157.4

just because ..it doesn't mean 94.3 just now meanings and tenses 307.3

keep meaning ‘stay' 128.10; keep (on) .. .ing 296.1 kibbutz plural 524.4
kick with two objects 610.1 kidnapped etc spelling 562.7 kilo plural
523.3 kilo- (prefix) 445.1

kind of (= sort of) 551; following article dropped 70.6; these kind of
551.2; discourse marker 157.16,17; softening expression 437.1 kind to
449; so kind as to 538.8 kinds of English accents 308.4; correctness,
rules 309; formality 311; international English 308.7; spoken and
written English 310; standard English and dialects 308; variation and
change 312 King, Queen etc without article 70.12 knife plural 524.1 know
structures and tenses 313; + object + infinitive without to 281.2; +
object + to be 607.3; and find out 313.5; and know about/of 313.4; know
about not followed by that 453.1; non-progressive verb 471.2; passive
(she is known to be...) 418.2; you know, I don't know discourse markers
157.17 knowledge uncountable 148.3 known to 410.5; well known 410.4

lack non-progressive verb 471.2; no following preposition 451.1; not
used in passive 412.4 lack (noun) preposition 449 large and wide 106.4;
large, big and great 106

last word order with complement 13.5; at last 204.2; expressions with no
preposition 451.2; last but one etc 116.1; last, the last and the latest
314; tenses after this is the last etc 591; the last ...to 284.3; last
three etc 314.2 lastly (discourse marker) 157.10 late adjective and
adverb 27.2;

(adverb) later and latest 138; and lately 27.2

lately with present perfect 455.5, 458.5

later and in 315

latest, last and the last 314

latter the latter 17.3

laugh preposition 449

lay and lie 316

lead and leaden 386.4

leaf plural 524.1

leam forms 317.1; + -ing form or infinitive 299.8; learn to and learn
how to 317.2 learned (adjective) pronunciation 18 least and fewest 318;
at least 318.6,

157.7,16

leave preposition 449; + object + infinitive 283; and forget 209; with
preparatory it (e.g. I'll leave it to you to decide) 447.4; with two
objects

610.1

leave off .. .ing 296.1 leaving out words see ellipsis left (=
remaining) 319 leisurely adjective and adverb 27.1 lend with two objects
610.1; and borrow 109; passive structures 415 length 'unmarked' use 350;
expressions with no preposition

451.8

length use of be 92.2

less and fewer 320.1; less + plural (e.g.

less people) 312.9; less of320.2 -less (suffix) 445.4 lesser 320.4 lest
321

let structures 322; + object + infinitive without to 281.2; let, allow
and permit 42; let him etc (third-person imperative) 323.3; let's 323;
question tag 488.3; let's see, let me see, let me think 323.2 let, rent
and hire 247 letters 146; words left out in informal letters 1

lexical phrases (fixed expressions) 255 lie and lay 316

life countable or uncountable 324;

plural 524.1 lightning uncountable 148.3 like (similarity, function)
326; comparative and superlative 137.5; feel like 202.3,4; like, as and
how 252.3; meaning 'as if 74.3; like this/ that and so 536; seem like
507.5 like (verb) structures and meanings 325; would have liked to have
seen etc 288.2; if you like 325.7; like to: no passive 418.6; non*
progressive verb

471.2 -like (suffix) 445.4

likely 327; adjective, not adverb 27.1;

structures 291.4; with there 587.5 link verbs 328 listen preposition
449; and hear 241;

listen to: passive structure 416.1 little (adjective) position 12.2; and
small 534

little (determiner), a little and (a) few 329; + inversion (auxiliary
before subject) 302.7; the little that 494.5; little of329.2; little
else 183.1; question tags 487.4 live position 12.2 lively adjective, not
adverb 27,1 loaf of bread 430.1 logo plural 523.3

lone, alone, lonely and lonesome 44 lonely adjective, not adverb 27.1
long (adjective) after measurement nouns 13.4 long (adverb)
longer/longest 138; a long way and far 200; long and (for) a long time
330 Long live the King 567.4 look link verb and ordinary verb 331;
non-progressive verb 471.2; not followed by </331.3; preposition 449;
discourse marker 157.19 look after, look for and fetch 331.4 look at +
object + -ing form or infinitive 242.4; look at, see and watch 506;
passive structure 416.1 look for, look after and fetch 331.4 look
forward to ...ing 298.2; look forward, expect, hope and wait 196 look
here (discourse marker) 157.19 look out for 599.5 lose and loose 332

lots, a lot 333.2; quite a lot 489.4; with comparatives 140.1 loud
adjective and adverb 27.2; (adverb) louder/loudest 138; loudly and aloud
334 louse plural 524.2 love meaning 'zero' 389.4 love non-progressive
verb 471.2;

+ object + infinitive 283; + -ing form or infinitive 299.9 lovely
adjective, not adverb 27.1 low adjective and adverb 27.2;

(adverb) lower/ lowest 138 luck uncountable 148.3 lucky to 284.2 luggage
uncountable 148.3 lunch and dinner 347 -ly (suffix) 445.4,5; spelling of
adverbs 557

macaroni uncountable 148.5 madam 363.2 made of/from/with 336 magic and
magical 254.3 majority the majority 333.5; the majority of + plural verb
526.2 make causative structures 335; + action noun (e.g. make a guess)
598.2; + object + infinitive without to 281.2; made of!from! with 336;
make and do 160; make oneself heard! understood 335.2; make somebody
welcome, happy etc 335.3; passive {he was made to it has been made
beautiful 418.3, 419; with two objects 610.1 mal- (prefix) 445.1 male
and masculine 203 man plural 524.2; man or men in noun + noun compounds
531.2; without article meaning ‘the human race'

222.6 manage to 282 mankind 222.6

manners plural with no singular 524.7 many and much 357; see also much
'marked' and 'unmarked' adjectives and nouns in measurements 350
marriage preposition 449 marry no following preposition 451.1; get
married 337; not used with each other / one another 171.5 mathematics
singular, no plural 524.3 matter non-progressive verb 471.2; it doesn't
matter and no matter 378.3 matter (noun) no matter who! what etc 378;
structure with there 587.2; the matter (with) 585 may and might 338-345
chances etc 339 may... (but) discourse marker showing concession 157.5,
342 may in wishes and hopes 341 maylmight as well 343 may! might have
done 339.8,9, 259.2 maylmight not and can't 339.4 might in indirect
speech 278.3 might meaning ‘would perhaps'

258.6, 339.5 migjit making questions etc less direct 436.4 permission
340

requests, suggestions and criticisms 344

the difference between may and might 339.2 the differences between
maylmight and canlcould 345 maybe position 22.4; and perhaps 346;

softening expression 437.1 mayor and mayoress 222.4 me (personal
pronoun) 428-429; after be 428.3; in double subjects (e.g. John and me
went) 428.3, 429.1; me neither, me either 374.2; me or / etc after as,
than, but and except 429.2; me too 46.3; me/my smoking etc 295.3; see
also personal pronouns

meals 347; thanks for meals etc

545.11.15

mean (verb) 348; + -ing form or infinitive 299.7; + object + infinitive
283; and think 348.2; / mean (discourse marker) 348.4, 157.15-16; I
meant to have done it 288.2; nonprogressive verb 471.2; structure of
questions 348.1; What do you mean?

348.5

meaning and opinion 348.2 means 349; by all!any! no means 349.2; means
o/and way of 615.4; singular and plural the same 524.3 measles singular,
no plural 524.3;

uncountable 148.7 measure non-progressive verb 471.2 measurement
‘marked' and

'unmarked' forms 350; a five-litre can etc 386.5; expressions without
preposition 451.8; high and tall 246; adjectives after measurement nouns
13.4; foot, inch etc 389.18 media singular (uncountable) or plural

524.3

meet (with) 312.9; not used with each other / one another 171.5 mega-
(prefix) 445.1 melt active or passive meaning 609.2 •ment (suffix) 445.2
mention ...ing 296.1 mere position 12.2 metre etc 389.18 micro- (prefix)
445.1 mid- (prefix) 445.1 Middle Ages plural with no singular

524.7 might see may mile 389.18 milli- (prefix) 445.1

million (a) million 389.11; and millions

389.15

mimicked spelling 562.8 mind (verb) meaning, use and structures 351 mind
you 157.3

mine, yours etc 442; a friend of mine etc 443 mini- (prefix) 445.1
ministry + singular or plural verb 526.1 mis- (prefix) 445.1 misrelated
participles 411.4 Miss 363.1c

miss (verb) meanings and structures 352

missing (adjective) 352.5 mistake for ... to 291.5 mistaken (very) much
mistaken 410.4 modal auxiliary verbs grammar and meanings 353-354; in
indirect speech 278.3; used to make questions etc less direct 436.4
moment the moment (that) 267 Monday etc with no preposition 451.3 money
notes, coins and amounts 389.16,17; singular verbs and pronouns 527.1
money uncountable 148.3 mono- (prefix) 445.1 monthly adjective and
adverb 27.1 more (adverb) 355.5; no more and not any more 379; more and
more 139.4 more (determiner) 355; more of 355.1,2; and other 54.2 more
in comparatives 137-138 more than one + singular verb 527.3 more or less
(discourse marker) 157.16 moreover 157.11 mosquito plural 523.3 most
356; most of356.1,2; and mostly 27.2; in superlatives 137-138; meaning
‘very' 356.7; (the) most as adverb 356.5 mostly 356.8

mother-in-law plural 524.6 mouse plural 524.2 mouths pronunciation 525.4
move active or passive meaning 609.1 mph (= miles per hour) 389.20 Mr,
Mrs and Ms 363.1c, 222.7 much and many 357; as much/ many... as 136.5,6;
+ relative clause with that 494.5; much/many of 357.2,3; much and very
with past participles 410.4; much as an adverb 357.7; much else 183.1;
much/many more 140.2; much too 595.3; much with comparatives and
superlatives 140

multi- (prefix) 445.1

musical instruments article use 70.10

must 358-361

and have (got) to 361.1 and should 359.6, 360.7 deduction (concluding
that something is cenain) 359 in indirect speech 278.3, 359.5, 360.6
must have done/been etc 359.4 must have done and had to do 361.3 must
not and need not 366.7 must, ought and should 520 must_{t} will have to
and have (got) to (future obligation) 361.2 mustn't and can't 359.2
mustn't in AmE 361.4 mustn't, needn't and doritfdoesn't have to 359.3,
360.4 necessity and obligation 360 pronunciation 358.1f weak and strong
form 616.3 my, your etc 441; my/me smoking etc 295.3,4; see also
possessives myself, yourself etc 493 naked pronunciation 18 names
English versions of place names, classical names etc 362 names and
titles (e.g. Peter, Mr Lewis) 363

nationalities nouns and adjectives (e.g. Ireland, Irish, an Irishman/
woman, the Irish) 364 nature without the 68.1, 69.4 near (adverb)
comparative and superlative 138 near (preposition) and by 118; near to
365

<<main-43.xhtml>>

nearest, next and the next 375 nearly position 24.4; nearly, almost and
practically 43; not used with never etc 43.3; with superlatives 140.3
necessary structure with should 521.1;

+ for... to 291.4; if necessary 261.6 need (noun) structure with there
587.2 need (verb) forms and use 366; + object + infinitive 283; needn't
have and didn't need to 366.6; in indirect speech 278.3; needn't,
mustn't and don't have to 359.3,360.4,366.7; need never + infinitive
366.6; nonprogressive verb 471.2 negative structures 367-371 ambiguous
sentences 371 basic rules 367

double negatives 370; in dialects 309.2; in expressions of doubt 261.8,

370.6

negative imperatives (e.g. don't worry) 367.2 negative infinitives 280.5
negative -ing forms (e.g. not knowing) 293.2 negative questions 368; as
exclamations 195.4; in indirect speech 278.6; yes and no in answers

368.4 n't 143

think, seem etc in negative structures 369

neglect to 282 negro plural 523.3 neither (adverb) position 24.6;
neither... nor 373; neither, nor and not... either 374 neither
(determiner) 372; neither of 372.1,2; neither one 395.5; neither, no and
none 376.5; pronunciation 372.4 neo- (prefix) 445.1 -ness (suffix) 445.2
never + inversion (auxiliary before subject) 302.7; and not ever 191.1;
not used with do 367.5; position 22.3, 24.2; position in imperatives
268.7; question tags 487.4; with present perfect 455.5; with simple past
457.4 nevertheless 157.3 news uncountable 148.3, 524.3 news headlines
240 next expressions with no preposition 451.2; next but one etc 116.1;
next, the next and the nearest 375; next Sunday two possible meanings
375.3; next three etc 375.2; word order with complement 13.5 nice
preposition 449; nice and 16.3 nickel 389.17 night at night 70.1 nil
389.4

no (adverb) no older etc, no different 57

no (answer) and yes 634; in answers to negative questions 368.4 no
(determiner) and neither 376.5; and not all 36.6; and not 382; no ...
but (= except) 116.1; no, none and not any 376; question tags 487.4 no
doubt 377; discourse marker 157.18 no good 57.3

no longer, not any more and no more 379

no matter who, what etc 378; and whoever, whatever etc 378.2; no matter
and it doesn't matter 378.3; no matter what with no following verb 378.4
no more, not any more and no longer 379

no need for ... to 291.5 no one 548; and none 380; and not anyone 370.2,
376.6; question tags

487.4, 488.5 No problem reply to thanks 433.5,

545.19

no sooner, hardly and scarcely 233 no use 57.3

nobody and no one 548; no difference 548.1; and not anybody 370.2;
nobody else 183.1; position with adjectives 13.6; question tags 487.4,
488.5 non- (prefix) 445.1

non-affirmative words (e.g. any, ever, yet) 381

non-assertive words see nonaffirmative words non-defining relative
clauses see identifying and non-identifying relative clauses none and
neither 376.5; none + relative clause with that 494.5; and no one 380;
none... but (= except) 116.1; none, no and not any 376; none of which
etc 498.8; none the worse, none the wiser etc 141.2 nonetheless 157.3
non-gradable adjectives 489.1 non-identifying relative clauses 495,
498.14

non-progressive verbs 471 no one position with adjectives 13.6;

no one else 183.1 nor and or 370.5; neither... nor 373;

nor, neither and not... either 374 normal structure with should 521.2;

normal for... to 291.4 normally position 22.3, 24.2 north and northern
etc 172; capital letters 172.3 northward(s) etc 614 not and no 382;
afraid!hope!believe not etc 28, 369.3, 539.2; if not 261.7; not all
36.6; not any, no and none 376; not... either, neither and nor 374; weak
and strong form 616.3; see also negative structures not a bit 107.3

not a grain/breath/scrap etc 430 not any more, no more and no longer 379

not at all 83.3; reply to thanks 433.5,

545.19

not ever and never 191.1 not in the least 318.7 not only ... but also
383 not quite 489.5

not until + inversion (auxiliary before subject) 302.7 not very 611.2

nothing 548; and not anything 370.2; nothing for...to 291.6; nothing
that 494.5; nothing to do and nothing to be done 287.3; position with
adjectives 13.6; question tags 487.4, 488.5 notice, hear etc something
happen(ing) 242 notices words left out 1.4 nought 389.4 noun +for... to
291.5 noun + infinitive (e.g. decision to leave) 285; noun + infinitive
+ preposition (e.g. a friend to play with) 285.5; work to do / to be
done etc

287.1

noun + -ing form 297 noun + noun 385-386; a five-litre can etc 386.5;
antique shop or antiques shop 312.9; article dropped 385.3; in news
headlines 240.2; noun + noun or preposition structure 386; stress 385.6;
structure with possessive's (e.g. children's clothes, cow's milk)
386.6-8

noun + 's forms 439; use 440; or preposition structure 440.1,2 noun
complementation what can follow a noun? 384 nouns left out after
adjectives 17 nouns used for actions (a crash, cough etc) 598

now (showing change of subject) 157.8 now (that) 387

nowadays 388

nowhere 548; and not anywhere 370.2, 376.6; position with adjectives
13.6 nucleus plural 524.4 number a large number 333.4; a number o/+
plural verb 526.2; article dropped after a number of 70.7 number see
singular and plural numbers 389; a five-litre can etc 386.5; five
pounds, twenty miles etc + singular verb 527.1; full stops in decimals
476.11; use of commas

476.11

oasis plural 524.4 object to ...ing 298.2 objects direct and indirect
610 oblige + object + infinitive 283 occasionally position 22.3, 24.2;
with present perfect 455.6 -ocracy (suffix) 445.2 odds plural with no
singular 524.7 of after: determiners 154.4; (a) little and (a) few
329.2; all 36.1; any 55.7; both 110.2,4; each 169.2; either 174.2;
enough 187.4; fractions and decimals 389.2; half 231.1; less and fewer
320.2; more 355.2; most 356.2; much and many 357.3; neither 372.2; none
376.2; some 546.6; which 622.3; whole

40.5

noun + noun with of or *s 440.1,2 weak and strong form 616.3 of course
390; (discourse marker)

157.5

of which 496.2

offer + infinitive 277.1, 282; passive structures 415; with two objects
610.1 offers 545.16

often 391; position 223, 24.2; with present perfect 455.6 OK showing
change of subject 157.8 old position and meaning 12.2; after measurement
nouns 13.4; the old 17.1; ‘unmarked* use 350 older English verb forms
392 -ology (suffix) 445.2 omission of words see ellipsis omni- (prefix)
445.1 on and about 4 on...ing 411.6

on (place) 81.2; on and onto 269; on, at and in 81; on the bus_{t} train
etc 81.4 on (time) 82; on, at and in 82; on!at weekends 312.9 on
condition that 263; + present with future meaning 580.2 on earth who on
earth etc 624 on foot 70.1 on holiday 248 on one's own 405.5 on the
contrary 157.6; and on the other hand 144.1 on the one hand, on the
other hand

157.2

on the way and in the way 615.5 on the whole 157.12 on time and in time
450 on top of that (discourse marker) 157.11 once (adverb) and one day
393; at once 393; with simple past or past perfect

424.1

once (conjunction) 394 one and a in numbers 389.11; one and a half
231.5; one and first, two and second etc 389.7; one Tuesday etc (no
preposition) 451.2; one/two more etc 355.4; one of 397 one. ones
(substitute word) 395 one, you and they (indefinite personal pronouns)
396; one's 441.2 one another and each other 171; and selves 171.4 one
day and once 393 oneself 493

only use and position 398; + inversion (auxiliary before subject) 302.7;
+ relative clause with that 494.5; if only 265; not only... but also
383; only today etc 398.4; only too 595.8; the only... ever 191.2; the
only... to

284.3

onto and on 269 open (adjective) and opened 399 open (verb) without
-self 493.9; active or passive meaning 609.1 operate preposition 449
opinion in my opinion 157.16; and according to me 8; opinion and point
of view 434 opportunity and possibility 400 opposite (adjective)
position 401; and contrary 144.2 opposite (noun) quite the opposite

157.6

opposite (preposition), facing and in front of 402 or + infinitive
without to 281.4; and nor 370.5; either... or 175; dropping words after
or 178; singular or plural verb after expression with or 532.2;
whether... or 620 -or (suffix) 445.2 or else 183.5

or rather (discourse marker) 104.2,

157.16

orchestra + singular or plural 526.1 order + object + infinitive 283
other and different 54.5; and more 54.2; and others 54 ought 403; and
had better 230.1; and should 403.2; in indirect speech

278.3; ought, must and should 520; ought to have done 403.5; question
and negative forms 403.1,4 ounce 389.18

our 441; weak and strong form 616.3

ours 442

ourselves 493

-ous (suffix) 445.4

out and out of 404

out- (prefix) 445.1

outskirts plural with no singular 524.7 outward(s) 614

over and above 6; over, across and through 10 over- (prefix) 445.1 owe
non-progressive verb 471.2; with preparatory it (e.g. we owe it to
society to) 447.4; with two objects

610.1

owing to and due to 166

own 405; non-progressive verb 471.2

ox plural 524.2

page on page ... 81.7 pair 430.3 pan- (prefix) 445.1 panicking etc
spelling 562.8 pants plural with no singular 524.7 paper (uncountable)
and a paper

148.4 paragraphs 406

Pardon? 545.8; Pardon me? 545.8; I beg your pardon 545.7,8 parking
uncountable 148.3 part without a 407 participles (-ing and -ed forms)
408-411

active and passive participles 409 after conjunctions and prepositions
(e.g. after talking to you) 411.6 after nouns (e.g. the people
questioned) 410.2 misrelated participles 411.4 participle clauses 411
past participles with by or other prepositions 410.5 past participles
with very and much

410.4

reduced relative clauses (e.g. the girl dancing with your brother)
498.10 used as adjectives 410 see also -ing forms particular in
particular 157.13 party preposition 450; with singular or plural verb
and pronoun 526.1 pass with two objects 610.1 passer-by plural 524.6
passives 412-420 by + agent 413

get as passive auxiliary [get caught etc) 223.5 he is believed to be...
418

he was considered a genius 419 infinitives (e.g. to be taken three times
a day, nothing to be done) 91.5,

287.2

-ing forms (being done) 293.2 it was thought that... 417 list of
structures and verb forms 412 meaning and grammar not the same

414.5

my suitcase is packed 420 passives without be in news headlines 240.2
position of prepositions 452 verbs not used in passive 412.4 verbs with
prepositions 416 verbs with two objects 415 when do we use passive
structures?

414

past continuous see past progressive past participles see participles
past perfect 423-425; or simple past with after, as soon as etc 424.1;
progressive 425; simple and progressive: the differences 425.4; with
before 97.3; with i/(‘unreal past') 259; with suppose, supposing, what
if (‘unreal past') 571; with as if(*unreal past') 74

past progressive forms and use 422; difference between past progressive
and simple past 422.3-6 past simple see simple past past tense instead
of would ... after conjunctions 580.6, 426.1 past verb form with present
or future meaning 426; after Vd rather etc 491.3; after j/258; after if
only 265; after it's time 306.2; after wish 630.4; in polite requests,
questions etc

436.1, 426.2 paths pronunciation 525.4 pay preposition 449; in passive
415; pay for ... to 291.7; one and two objects 610.7 penny, pennies and
pence 524.2, 389.16,17 people, personfs) and peoples 524.2 per (e.g. 70
miles per hour) 389.20 perfect infinitive (to have done) 280.2; after
modal verbs (e.g. You should have written) 288.3 perfect -ing forms
(e.g. having slept)

293.2

perfect tenses 427; with after 30.3; with before 97.3; with ever 191.3;
with for and since 208.2; see also present perfect, past perfect, future
perfect perhaps position 22.3; and maybe 346 period (full stop) 473
permission uncountable 148.3 permit + object + infinitive 283; + -ing
form or infinitive 299.4; permit, allow and let 42 person, persons,
people and peoples

524.2

personal pronouns 428-429 after adjectives (e.g. Poor you!) 429.7 he!
she who 429.9 / and me, she and her etc: the differences 428.2, 429 / in
double objects (e.g. between you and I) 429.1 indirect speech 274.3 It
referring to nothing, the situation, time, weather, temperature,
distances 428.7,8 it used to identify (e.g. Its John) 428.9 it was me
that... f it ivas I who... etc 429.3

me, him, her etc in double subjects (e.g. John and me went) 428.3,429.1
me or I etc after as, than, but, except

429.2

me! my smoking etc 295.3 personal and relative pronouns not used
together 511.2 they meaning 'he or she' 222.3 us meaning 'me' 429.6 us
women etc 429.1 we women, you men etc 428.10 we. inclusive and exclusive
429.5 you folks!guys 312.1, 429.8; older and dialect singular and plural
forms of you 429.8, 392 persuade + object + infinitive 283 phenomenon
plural 524.4 -phiie (suffix) 445.2 -phobe, -phobia (suffixes) 445.2
phone preposition 450 photo plural 523.3; take a photo 160.6 photo-
(prefix) 445.1 phrasal verbs 599 physics singular, no plural 524.3 piano
plural 523.3 picnickers etc spelling 562.8 picture in a picture 81.7
piece 430.1

piece- and group-words 430 pint BrE and AmE 389.18 piss (taboo word /
swearword) 575 pity countable or uncountable 148.6 place expressions
with no preposition 451.11; a place to live etc 431; a place we can stay
etc 498.6; in the first/ second etc place 157.10 place-names articles
70.17; English versions 362 plan (noun) for ... to 291.5 plane by plane
70.1; on!in a plane 81.4 play (noun) and game 432.1 play (verb) with one
and two objects 610.7; play and act 432.2 please and thank you 433
please non-progressive verb 471.2 pleased preposition 449; + infinitive

284.1 plenty 333.3

plural see singular and plural

pm (= in the afternoon/evening) 579.3 Poet Laureate 13.1 poetess 222.4
poetry uncountable 148.3 point at or to 80.3 point uncountable use
149.2; there's no point etc 587.2 point of view preposition 450; and
opinion 434 pointless for ...to 291.4 police plural with no singular
524.7 policeman/woman 222.4 polish active or passive meaning 609.2
polite preposition 449 politeness 435-7; distancing verb forms 436;
please and thank you 433; softening expressions 437; questions as
requests 435 politic and political 254.3 politics singular and plural
the same 524.3; and policy 438 poly- (prefix) 445.1 poor the poor 17.1
possess non-progressive verb 471.2 possessive's 439-440; articles
dropped 70.3; with noun + noun (e.g. children's clothes) 386.6; not used
with the poor etc 17.1; or preposition structure 440.1,2 possessives
439-443; a friend of mine etc 443; mine, yours etc 442; my, your etc
441; noun + 's 439-440; my smoking, John's going to sleep etc

295.3

possibility and opportunity 400 possible position after noun 13.2,

498.10

post with two objects 610.1 post- (prefix) 445.1 postcards words left
out 1.2 postpone .. .ing 296.1 potato plural 523.3 pound (English money)
389.16 pound (weight) 389.18 practically position 24.4; practically,
almost and nearly 43 practise .. .ing 296.1 pre- (prefix) 445.1

predicative position of adjectives 12.1 prefer structures 444; + -ing
form or infinitive 299.9; + object + infinitive 283; prefer...ing to..
.ing 298.2; non-progressive verb 471.2 prefixes 445

premises plural with no singular 524.7 preparatory it 446-447; with -ing
forms 295.5; in passives {it was thought that it was decided to etc)
417; with Jbr...to etc 291.4 prepare to 282 prepositions 448-454 after
particular words and expressions 449 after superlatives (e.g. the
happiest man in the world etc) 139.7 at the ends of clauses 452 before
conjunctions 453 before -ing forms 298, 454 before particular words and
expressions 450 dropped before question words 453.4 dropped before that
453.1,2 dropped in abbreviated styles 1 expressions without prepositions
451, 82.7 place 81

prepositional verbs (e.g. look at) 600 prepositional verbs in passive
structures 416 prepositions and adverb particles 20 time 82

see also the entries for particular prepositions prescriptive and
descriptive rules 309.4 present position and meaning 13.3 present and
present perfect the differences 460 present continuous see present
progressive present participles see participles present perfect 455-460;
for future after conjunctions 580.3; or present 460; or simple past
456-457; or simple past with already and yet 566.7; or simple past with
just and just now 307.2,3; passive {has been done) 412.3 present perfect
continuous see present perfect progressive present perfect progressive
458; or simple 459; with after 30.3; with before 97.3; with ever 191.3;
with for and since 208.2 present progressive 464-6; or simple present
461.2,3, 463.1-3, 464.6, 466; or present perfect progressive 460;
passive {is being done) 412.3; talking about changes 464.4; used for
future 214, 216, 218 present simple see simple present present tenses
461-466 in stories, commentaries and instructions 465 used for future
213-216, 218 used for future after after 30.2; as... as 136.10; before
97.2; bet 103.2;

most conjunctions 580.2; for 208.1; hope 250.1; if257.2; so that / in
order that 543; suppose, supposing and what i/571; unless 601.3; until

602.4

see also simple present; present progressive presently 467

President etc without article 70.12 President elect 13.1 presume there
are presumed to be

418.4 pretend to 282

pretty adjective and adverb 27.2; and prettily 27.2; pretty, fairly,
quite and rather 199 prevent preposition 449; + object + from + -ing
form 296.2 price and prize 468 prick (taboo word / swearword) 575 prince
and princess 222.4 principle and principal 469 prison expressions
without article 70.1 prize and price 468 pro-(prefix) 445.1 probable
structures 291.4 probably position 24.3 professor 363.3 progress
uncountable 148.3 progressive forms 470-472; in polite requests,
questions etc 436.2; nonprogressive verbs 471; and simple forms with as,
when and while 73; progressive infinitive (to be doing) 280.1; with
always etc 472; see also present progressive; present perfect
progressive; past progressive; future progressive promise + infinitive
277.1, 282; / promise 466.4; non-progressive verb 471.2; passive
structures 415; with two objects 610.1 prone structures 298.2 pronouns
see personal pronouns; reflexive pronouns; relative pronouns etc
pronunciation accents 308.3; British and American differences 51.4;
pronunciation and spelling 565; ‘received pronunciation* 308.3; silent
letters 565.3; weak and strong forms 616; pronunciation of; a!an 65.7;
aged, naked etc 18; ate, shone in AmE 304.3; can't 143.4 Note 3; -ed
421.2; -(e)s 462.3; either 174.6; going to (‘gonna*) 213.5; got to
(‘gotta') 239.4; Mr, Mrs, Ms 363.3; must 358.1f; neither 372.4; often
391; plurals 525; possessive's 439.2; read 304.1; says 304.3; some
546.2,6,7; the 64.8; want to (‘wanna*) 308.4, 613.4; younger/

-est_{t} longer!-est, strongerf -iest 137.1 see also stress; intonation
proof preposition 449 -proof (suffix) 445.4 proper position and meaning
13.3 propose + infinitive or -ing form 296.4 proved or proven 304.3
provided/providing (that) 263 pseudo- (prefix) 445.1 psycho- (prefix)
445.1 public (noun) + singular or plural

526.1

publicity uncountable 148.3 punctuation 473-479 apostrophe 479; in
plural abbreviations 2.4 colon 474; in news headlines 240.2 comma 476;
after subordinate clauses 510.4; in numbers 389.10; in relative clauses
495.2; with adjectives 15.6 dash 477

exclamation mark 473

full stop 473; in numbers 389.1,10;

not used in abbreviations 2.1 question mark 473; in news headlines
240.2; not used in indirect questions

276.2

quotation marks (‘inverted commas') 478; in news headlines 240.2
semi-colon 475 push not followed by indirect object

610.6 put off ...ing 296.1 put up with 599.5

pyjamas plural with no singular 524.7

quarter (American money) 389.17 Queen, King etc without article 70.12
question uncountable use 149.2 question mark 473; in news headlines
240.2; not used in indirect questions

276.2

question tags 487-488; after imperatives 268.6; words left out before
tags 179.4 questions 480-486; declarative questions (e.g. You're working
late?) 481; echo questions 483; indirect questions 276; negative
questions 368; position of prepositions 452; question-word clauses 485;
questions about fftaf-clauses 486; in polite requests 435.1; reply
questions (e.g. Was it?) 484; rhetorical questions (e.g. How should I
know?) 482 quick adjective and adverb 27.2; (adverb) quicker!-est 138;
quickly, soon and early 550 quite meanings, structures and word order
489; quite, fairly, rather and

pretty 199; quite with superlatives 140.3; softening expression 437.1
quite a bit, few, lot etc 489.4 quite the opposite (discourse marker)
157.6 quotation marks 478; in news headlines 240.1

radio preposition 450; (the) radio 70.11 radius plural 524.4 ragged
pronunciation 18 rain in the rain 81.7 raise and rise 304.2 rare for ...
to 291.4 rarely position 24.2; + inversion (auxiliary before subject)
302.7 rather (adverb of degree) meanings, structures and word order 490;
I'd rather like and I'd rather have 491.2; rather, fairly, quite and
pretty 199; with comparatives 140.1 rather (preference) 491; or rather
157.16; and better 104.2; rather than + infinitive without to 281.4;
softening expression 437.1; would rather 491.3; had rather (obsolete
expression)

491.3 re- (prefix) 445.1 read with two objects 610.1 ready to 284.4

real adjective and adverb 27.2;

comparative and superlative 137.5 realise non-progressive verb 471.2
really used for emphasis 184.3;

discourse marker 157.16 reason for/why/that 492; for...

reason 450; uncountable use 149.2 'received pronunciation' 308.3
recently with present perfect 455.5,

458.5

reckon so/not 539; I reckon 157.16 recognise non-progressive verb 471.2
recommend + object + infinitive 283;

+ subjunctive 567.2 recovered active past participle 409.4 reduced
relative clauses (e.g. the girl dancing with your brother) 498.10
reference with reference to 157.1 reflexive pronouns 493; and each other
! one another 171.4; emphatic use (e.g. Do it yourself) 493.4 refuse +
infinitive 282; passive

structures 415; with two objects 610.1 regard as 607.2; in passive 419
regarding 157.1

regards plural with no singular 524.7 regret + -ing form or infinitive
299.3 relative clauses see relative structures relative pronouns [who,
which etc after nouns) 494---498; not used together with personal
pronouns 511.2; see also relative structures

relative structures 494-498 basic information 494 comprehension problems
515.3 dropping object pronouns 495.4 identifying and non-identifying
clauses 495 intonation and punctuation 495.2 position of prepositions
452, 498.7 relative + infinitive a garden in which to play etc 498.13
relative structures after way 615.2 use of that 494.5, 495.3, 498.4,
498.6 what 497

when, where and why 494.10 which referring to whole clause 494.9 whose
496

with indirect speech: somebody I know you'll like, a car that I didn't
know how fast it could go 498.15,16 reluctant for ... to 291.3 remain
128.9

remains plural with no singular 524.7 remember + -ing form or infinitive
299.1; can remember 125.3; nonprogressive verb 471.2; and remind 499.1;
remember me to X 545.13 remind structures and preposidon 499.2,3; and
remember 499.1 rent, hire and let 247 repetition use and avoidance 500
reply questions 484 report there are reported to be,.. 418.4 reported
speech see indirect speech reporting direct speech punctuation (use of
commas and colons) 474.6 request (noun) for... to 291.5 request (verb) +
object + infinitive 283 require + -ing form (passive meaning)

296.3

research uncountable 148.3 resemble no following preposition 451.1; no
passive 412.4 resent .. .ing 296.1 resist ...ing 296.1 responsible and
responsibility preposition 449 rest the rest 501 result 05 a result
157.14 retired active past participle 409.3,4 rhetorical questions 482
rhythm 554.6 rich the rich 17.1 right adjective and adverb 27.2; +
infinitive 284.2; comparative and superlative 137.5; showing change of
subject 157.8; and rightly 27.2; right for ...to 291.4 ring back 87.5

rise and arise 59; and raise 304.2 risk .. .ing 296.1 road and street
502 Roman numbers (/, II, HI etc) 389.6 roofs pronunciation 525.4 rotten
410.6

round, around and about 60 rubbish uncountable 148.3 rude preposition
449 rugged pronunciation 18 rules prescriptive and descriptive rules

309.4 run into 449 runner-up plural 524.6

^{f}s see possessive's sacred pronunciation 18 Safe journey home 545.9
Saint weak and strong form 616.3 same 503; word order with complement
13.5 satisfy non-progressive verb 471.2 savings plural with no singular
524.7 say structures 277.3; not used to report questions 276.4; past
progressive use (e.g. John was saying) 422.7; passive structures (he is
said to be, there was said to be, it is said that) 417.1, 418.2,4; say
and tell 504; simple present in quotations (Hamlet says...) 466.5; he
says so 540.1; so he says 539.3 says pronunciation 304.3 scales plural
with no singular 524.7 scarcely position 24.4; question tags 487.4;
scarcely, hardly and no sooner 233

school expressions without article 70.1; + singular or plural 526.1
scissors plural with no singular 524.7 Scot 364; Scottish and Scotch 364
Note a

scratch active or passive meaning

609.2

sea expressions without article 70.1;

the sea 69.4 search preposition 449 secondly, thirdly etc 157.10
Secretary General 13.1 see meanings and structures 505; + object +
infinitive or -ing form 242.1; can see 125.1; I see that... 243; she was
seen to 418.3; progressive and non-progressive uses 471.3; see if!
whether 506.6; see, look at and watch 506; see... as 607.2; he was seen
as 419

see above/over 6.6

See you (later etc) 545.2 seem structures and use 507; and appear 58.2;
can't seem to 507.4; in negative sentences 369.4; it seems so 536.1; it
seems that I as 1/507.6; nonprogressive verb 471.2; there seems to be
507.7

seldom position 24.2; + inversion (auxiliary before subject) 302.7 self
plural 524.1 -self (myself etc) see reflexive pronouns sell active or
passive meaning 609.1;

with two objects 610.1 semi- (prefix) 445.1 semi-colon 475

send with two objects 610.1; in passive 415

sense there's no sense in etc 587.2 sensible and sensitive 508 sentence
structure basic word order 509; conjunctions 510-511; ellipsis (leaving
out words) 177-182; embedding (clause inside clause) 515; fronting 513;
information structure 512; reasons for using passives 414; spoken
structures and tags 514; understanding complicated sentences 515; see
also the entries for particular structures (e.g. if; imperatives;
exclamations; relative structures; indirect speech) series singular and
plural the same

524.3

set of cutlery etc 430.4 several 154.3 sexist language 222 shade and
shadow 516 shall offers, suggestions, asking for instructions and
decisions 217.5; indirect speech 278.3; legal documents etc 218.6; shall
and will (future auxiliaries) 212,216-220; shall I...? in indirect
speech 278.4; weak and strong form 616.3; will replacing shall 312.9
shame for ... to 291.5 shape expressions with no preposition

451.8

shape use of be 92.2 share between/among 105.3 sharp adjective and
adverb 27.2; and sharply 27.2 shave without -self 493.9 she 428-429;
used for animals, countries, ships etc 222.1; weak and strong form
616.3; see also personal pronouns sheep singular and plural the same

524.3

sheer position 12.2 sheet of paper, grain of sand etc 430.1 shelf plural
524.1 -ship (suffix) 445.2 shit (taboo word / swearword) 575 shocked to
284.1; bylat 410.5; with should 521.2; very shocked 410.4 shone AmE
pronunciation 304.3

short adjective and adverb 27.2; and shortly 27.2; in short 157.21 short
answers (e.g. Yes, he can) 517 shorten 128.9

should meanings, structures and use 518-521

after I insisted, it's important, it's surprising etc 521; after in case
271.2; after so that ! in order that

543.3

and had better 230.1; and must 359.6, 360.7; and ought 403.2; should,
ought and must 520 I should meaning *If 1 were you, I should* 264 in
if-clauses 261.1; in indirect speech 278.3; in sentences with if258-259;
in subordinate clauses 521 not used for past 519.3 should happen to 232
should have done 519.4 should I meaning 'if I should* etc

261.5

shouldl would after [ and we 518.5 weak and strong form 616.3 who should
I see but etc 116.1 would replacing should 312.9 shout at or to 80.3;
passive structure

416.1

show one and two objects 610.7;

passive structures 415 shrunken 410.6 shut and close 132 sick and ill
266; he's sick ! he's being sick 89 side either side 174.5 silk and
silken 386.4 silly adjective, not adverb 27.1 similar word order with
complement

13.5

similarly (discourse marker) 157.4 simple past forms, spelling,

pronunciation and use 421; or past progressive 422.3-6; or present
perfect 456-457; or present perfect with already and yet 566.7; or past
perfect with after, as soon as etc 424.1; instead of past progressive or
perfect after conjunctions 580.7 simple present forms, spelling,
pronunciation and use 461-463,465-466; or present progressive 461.2,3,

463.1-3,464.6,466; or present perfect 460, 463.6; instead of present
progressive after conjunctions 580.7; future use 215 since tenses 522;
since, for, in and from (time) 208; since.. .ing 411.6; with present
perfect progressive 458.5 since, as, because and for 72 sing structures
with one and two objects 610.7 singular and plural 523-532

a three-mile walk etc 386.5, 389.15 another ! a good three hours etc
532.6 distributive plural (e.g. they opened their books) 441.4 fractions
and decimals 389.2,3 lie!she or they after each 169.3 he!she or they
after either 174.4 hundred and hundreds etc 389.15 irregular and special
plurals 524 is!are after u/fcar-clause 130.1 mixed structures 529 noun +
noun (e.g. a shoe shop) 385.2, 531

nouns and verbs after one of 397 one and a half 231.5 one of the... who
have/has etc 529.1 plural expressions with singular verbs 527 plural
after here's, there's, where's

532.4

plural with apostrophe (e.g. i960';)

524.5

plurals of compound nouns 524.6 pronunciation of plurals 525 singular
nouns with plural verbs 526 singular and plural with sort of etc

551.2

spelling of plurals 523 they meaning ‘he or she* 222.3, 528 verb after
as well as 532.2; bread and jam etc 532.2; each 169.2; either of 174.2;
half (of) 231.1; neither of 372.2; neither... nor 373; number/ majority
of etc 526.2; or 532.2; the rest 501; who and what 532.3 see also
separate entries for particular words sir 363.2; weak and strong form
616.3 size expressions with no preposition

451.8 size use of be 92.2 sky in the sky 81.7 slang 533

slang uncountable 148.3 Sleep well 545.20 sleeping and asleep 86.2
sleepy be sleepy 92.1 slow adjective and adverb 27.2; (adverb)
comparative and superlative 138

small and little 534 smell 535; can smell 125.1; progressive and
non-progressive uses 471.3 smile preposition 449 snow preposition 450 so
(adverb) meaning ‘like this/that' 536; do so 162; even so 189.5; I
think/ hope/believe etc so 539.1; I don't think!believe etc so 369.3; I
told you so 540.2; if so 261.7; Vm afraid so 28.2; so am 1, so have I
etc 541.1; so I hear,(

believe etc 539.3; so it is, so J have etc 541.2; so with say and tell
539.3, 540 so (degree adverb) so tired, so fast etc 538; and so much
538.7; and such 569; and very 538.2; ever so 192; exclamations and
emphasis 195.3, 184.3; not so ... as 136.2; so ... as to 538.8; so ...
that 538.4; so warm a day etc 14; verb before subject after so 302,5

so meaning‘because of this/that* 157.14; so and because not used
together 511.1; so and then 537 so as to 289.2 so be it 567.4 so few
538.6 so little 538.6

so long as meaning 'on condition that' 263

so much and so 538.7 so much and so many 542; he didn't so much as
542.4; if he so much as 542.4; it's not so much ... as/that 542.4 so
that and in order that 543 so to speak 157.16 so-and-so 544 so-so 544

social language 545 society without the 68.1, 69.4 socio- (prefix) 445.1
solo plural 523.3

some meanings, pronunciation and use 546; and any 547; some of546.6; and
others 546.7; expressions with no preposition 451.2; some or no article
67; some of whom etc 498.8; weak and strong form 616.3 some time,
sometime and sometimes 549

somebody and someone 548; no difference 548.1; position with adjectives
13.6; question tags 488.5; with else 183.1 someplace 548.6 something
548; position with adjectives 13.6; something else 183.1; + for... to
291.6; something that

494.5

sometime and once 393; sometime, sometimes and some time 549 sometimes
position 22.3, 24.2; with present perfect 455.6 somewhere 548; position
with

adjectives 13.6; somewhere else 183.1; somewhere I can lie down etc
498.6 soon comparative and superlative 138;

soon, early and quickly 550 soprano plural 523.3 sorry preposition 449;
+ -ing form or infinitive 299.14; sorry about not followed by that
453.2; Sorry and

Excuse me 545.7; Sorry? (asking for repetition) 545.8; with should 521.2
sort of 551; discourse marker

157.16,17; article dropped after sort of 70.6; these sort of 551 sound
(adjective and adverb) 27.2;

sound and soundly 27.2 sound (verb) 552; non-progressive verb 471.2
south and southern etc 172; capital letters 172.3 spacecraft singular
and plural the same 524.3 spaghetti uncountable 148.5 Spanish the
Spanish 17.2 speak to /with 312.9; and talk 553 speaking of/about 157.1
special(ly) and especial(ly) 188 species singular and plural the same

524.3

spectacles plural with no singular

524.7

speech 554-555; intonation 555; stress and rhythm 554; see also
pronunciation; spoken English spelling 556-565

British-American differences 51.3 capital letters 556; national
adjectives [Italian etc) 364; North(ern), South(ern) etc 172 ch and tch,
k and ck 563 comparative and superlative adjectives 137.1 contractions
{I'm, won't etc) 143.1 doubling final consonants 562 final -e 560

hyphens 559; numbers [forty-one etc)

389.10 -icly and -ically 254.4 ie and ei 564 -ise and -ize 558 -ly 557

Mr, Mrs, Ms 363.3 noun + noun expressions (e.g. bathroom, living-room,
fiirniture shop) 385.7 plurals 523 simple past 421

spelling and pronunciation (strange and difficult spellings) 565
third-person singular present {works, cries, watches etc) 462 yand i561
spend + object + -ing form 296.2 spit AmE forms 304.3 spite in spite of
272 split infinitive 280.7 spoken and written English 310 spoken English
typical structures 514; contractions 143; informal relative structures
498.15-17; informal structures with i/262; intonation 555;

question tags 487-488; reply questions (e.g. Was it? Did you?) 484;
short answers (e.g. Yes, he can) 517; spoken calculations 389.22,23;
stress and rhythm 554; tags 514; use and avoidance of repetition
500.3,5,7; see also pronunciation spokesman/woman/person 222.5 spring
with or without the 70.9 square foot, mile etc 389.19 staff plural with
no singular 524.7 stain active or passive meaning 609,2 stand (can't)
stand...ing 296.1 standard English and dialects 308,

309.2

start + -ing form or infinitive 299.10; active or passive meaning 609.1;
and begin 99; to start with 157.10 state verbs 471.1

statistics singular and plural the same

524.3

stay 128.10; stay and 53.2 steal ... from passive structure 416.2
steward and stewardess 222.4 still, yet and already 566; still
emphasising contrast 157.3 stimulus plural 524.4 stomach-ache countable
or uncountable 148.7 stone and stony 386.4 stone (British measure of
weight) 389.18 stop + -ing form or infinitive 299.12; + object (+ from)
+ -ing form 296.2 stopped active past participle 409.4 storey see floor
stories use of present tenses 465 straight adjective and adverb 27.2
strange for ... to 291.4 street and road 502 street names stress 502.2
stress 554; for emphasis 184.2; in abbreviations 2.2; in noun + noun
structures 385.6, 386.9; in street names 502.2; stressed and unstressed
contractions 143; weak and strong forms 616.2 strike and stroke 304.2
strong and weak forms 616 stupid to 284.2 sub- (prefix) 445.1

subject separated from sentence 514 subjunctives 567; in older English
392;

with lest 321 subordinate clauses use of commas

510.4

subordinating conjunctions 510.2 such 568; and so 569; and very 568.4;
ever such 192; exclamations 195.3; such ... that / as to 568.5; such
a/an 568; such as 568.6; use for emphasis

184.3 such-and-such 568.7 suffer preposition 449 suffixes 445 sugar
uncountable 148.5 suggest structures 570; in passive 415 suit no passive
412.4; suit... for... to 291.7; and fit 206 sum to sum up 157.21 summer
with or without the 70.9 Sunday etc expressions with no preposition
451.3 sunken 410.6 super- (prefix) 445.1 superlatives see comparatives
and superlatives supper and dinner 347 suppose non-progressive verb
471.2; in negative sentences 369; suppose sol not 539; / suppose
(discourse marker) 157.16 suppose, supposing (conjunction) 571 supposed
be supposed to 572 sure adjective and adverb 27.2; + -ing form or
infinitive 299.15; be sure and 53.1; and surely 27.2 surely 573; and
certainly 573.1 surnames use 363.Id surprise non-progressive verb 471.2;
+ infinitive 284.1 surprised by/at 410.5; very surprised

410.4

surprising structure with should 521.2 surroundings plural with no
singular

524.7

swear + infinitive 282; / swear 466.4 swearwords and taboo words 575
Swiss singular and plural the same

524.3

swollen active past participle 409.3 sympathetic 574

taboo words and swearwords 575 tags 514.2,3; question tags 487-488;

dropping words before tags 179.4 take and bring 112; take + action noun
(e.g. take a bath) 598.2; take or have {a bath, shower etc) 236.1; take
a photo 160.6; take (time) 576; take (time) for...to 291.7; take with
two objects 610.1,6 take care (of), care (about) and care for 127; Take
care 545.2 take part preposition 449 talk (noun) a talk 598.1 talk
(verb) and speak 553; talking about 157.1 tall 'unmarked' use 350; tall
and high 246

<<main-44.xhtml>>

taste 577; can taste 125.1; progressive and non-progressive uses 471.3
tea (afternoon meal) 347 teach + -ing form or infinitive 299.8; + object
+ infinitive 283; with one and two objects 610.1,7 team + singular or
plural 526.1 tear active or passive meaning 609.2 tele- (prefix) 445.1
telephone numbers 389.5 telephoning 578 television without article 70.11
tell and say 504

tell structures 277.1; can tell 125.2; he told me so etc 540.1; passive
structures 415, 418.1; so he told me etc 539.3; with one and two objects

610.1,7 telling the time 579 tempt + object + infinitive 283 tend
structure with there 587.2 tense and time 10.2 tenses active verb forms
with their names 10; in indirect speech 275; in older English 392;
passive forms 412.3; tense simplification in subordinate clauses 580 see
also past verb form with present or future meaning, and entries for
individual tenses for tenses with particular words and expressions, see
after; as ... as; as if/though; as long as; as, when and while; before;
bet; ever; for; hope; if; just; just now; since; still, yet and already;
than; wish text messages 147 than 139.1; + infinitive without to 281.4;
than, as and that 139.1; dropping words after than 177.7; inversion:
verb before subject after than 302.5; than replacing subjects, objects
and complements (e.g. than is necessary) 581; than me, than 1 am etc
139.6, 429.2; weak and strong form 616.3; will or present tense with
future meaning after than 580.2 than ever 191.2

thank you, thanks 433.3; thanks plural with no singular 524.7 thanking
people 545.19 thankful and grateful 582 that and those (demonstratives)
589-590; expressions with no preposition (e.g. that afternoon) 451.2;
that one 395.5; that is where 130.5; that! those 0/395.7; that, this and
it 590 that (conjunction) dropped 584; comprehension problems 515.4; not
used after prepositions 453.1; that and as not used together 511.1;
that-clauses 583; preparatory it 583.4; that, than and as 139.1; the
fact that 583.3; weak and strong form 616.3 that (relative pronoun) see
relative structures that is to say 157.15,16 That's all right / OK
(reply to thanks etc) 433.5,545.19 the (definite article) 61-64, 68-70
dropped after all and both 36.5, 70.5; after amount/number o/70.7; in
noun + noun compounds 70.4; after possessive *s 70.3; in advertisements,
instructions etc 1,

70.19

generalisations with and without the 68

in bed etc 70.1

measurements [by the kilo etc) 70.16 musical instruments 70.10 parts of
the body 70.15 radio, cinema, theatre and television

70.11

the accused 17.3; the blind, deaf, old etc 17.1; the British, Dutch etc
17.2 the meaning ‘enough" 187.8 the older..., the happier... etc 139.5
weak and strong form 616.3 with half 2313 with superlatives 141.6 see
also articles the British Isles, Britain, the United Kingdom, and
England 114 the fact that 453.3,583.3 the former, the latter 17.3 the
hell, what the hell etc 624 the majority 333.5; + plural verb 526.2 the
matter (with) 585 the Middle Ages plural with no singular 524.7 the
moment (that) 267 the rest 501 the same 503

the United Kingdom, Britain, the British Isles and England 114 the way
(= how) 252.7 theatre preposition 450; (the) theatre

70.11 thee 392

their 441; meaning ‘his or her* 528 theirs 442

them 428-429; meaning ‘him or her' 528; weak and strong form 616.3
themselves 493

then (discourse marker) 157.14; if...

then 261.9; and so 537 there and here 245; + inversion (verb before
subject) 22.5, 303 there two pronunciations and meanings 586 there is
(introducing indefinite

subjects) 587; in question tags 488.4; pronunciation 587.1; there
appears/ happens/seems etc to be 587.5; there is certain!sure etc to be
587.5; there

lives, there remains etc 587.6; there might be, there could be etc
587.5; there is thought to be 418.4 There you go 545.18 there's + plural
noun 532.4 therefore (discourse marker) 157.14 thermo- (prefix) 445.1
these 589; these kind of etc 551.2 they 428-429; meaning ‘he or she'
222.3, 528; they, one and you (indefinite pronouns) 396 thicken 128.9
thief plural 524.1 thine 392

thing for one!another thing, another thing is (discourse markers)
157.10,11 think meanings and structures 588; think so!not 539; don't
think so ! think not 369.3; / think (discourse marker) 157.16;
prepositions 449; progressive (‘continuous*) and nonprogressive uses
471.3; he is thought to be 418.2; it was thought that 418.2; there are
thought to be 418.4 thirsty be thirsty 92.1 this and that 589-590; on
the

telephone 578.4; this Sunday etc (no preposition) 451.2; this one 395.5;
this is the first! last etc; tenses 591; this is where 130.5; this!that
and it (things that have just been mentioned) 590; this week etc with
present perfect or past 457.3; this week etc with present perfect
progressive 458.5 those 589; those kind of etc 551.2; those
questioned!selected etc 410.2; see also that thou 392

though, although, but and however 49; even though 189.4; though
intelligent etc 177.11; though meaning ‘however* 49.4; tired though she
was etc 71

thought countable or uncountable 148.6; preposition 449; the thought
of.. .ing 297.1 thousand (a) thousand 389.11;

thousand(s) 389.15 through and along 45; through, across and over 9;
through used for time 592 throw at/to 80.3; in passive 416.2;

with two objects 610.1 thunder uncountable 148.3 thy 392

tight adjective and adverb 27.2 till 602

time (countable or uncountable) meanings and structures 593; any time
you're in town etc 498.6; by the time that 117.1; in a month's time etc
82.6; time to 306; time far ...to 291.5;

it's time you went etc 306.2; on/in time 450; telling the time 579 time
and tense 10.2 tired of ...mg297,1 titles and names (e.g. Mr Lewis,
Peter) 363; Ms 222.7 tits (taboo word / swearword) 575 to (infinitive
marker) 280.6; used instead of whole infinitive 182; weak and strong
form 616.3 to (preposition) and at/in 80; and until/till 602.2; dropped
after where 619; to .. .ing 298.2; to bed!school/ hospital etc 70.1;
weak and strong form 616.3 to begin with (discourse marker)

157.10

to blame 287.2

to hear her talk, you'd think, to see

them, you'd think etc 292.2 to some /a great extent 157.12 to start with
(discourse marker)

157.10

to sum up 157.21 to tell the truth 157.20 today with present perfect or
past

457.3

tomato plural 523.3 tonight 594

too (adverb), also and as well 46; in negative clauses 47; position
46.1,4; me too 46.3 too (determiner) structures and meaning 595; and too
much 595.2; and very 595.1,7; much too, far too etc 595.3; special word
order with adjectives 14 too much/many 596; too much and too 595.2 tooth
plural 524.2 toothache countable or uncountable

148.7

tornado plural 523.3 toward(s) 614.3

town expressions without article 70.1;

and city 129; the town 69.4 traffic uncountable 148.3 train by train
70.1; on a train 81.4 trans- (prefix) 445.1 translate preposition 449
travel (uncountable) and journey 148.3; countable use 149.3; travel,
journey, trip and voyage 597 travelling etc spelling 562.6 tri- (prefix)
445.1

trip preposition 449; Have / Did you have a good trip 545.9; trip,
travel, journey and voyage 597 troops plural with no singular 524.7
trouble + (object +) infinitive 282-3 trousers plural with no singular
524.7 true it is true (discourse marker) 157.5

truths pronunciation 525.4 try + -mg form or infinitive 299.6; try and
53.1 try (noun) one more try 598.1 tube by tube 70.1 turn, turn into
(changes) 128.7 turning verbs into nouns 598 TV preposition 450; without
article

70.11

twat (taboo word / swearword) 575 twice as ... as etc 136.7 two-part
verbs (e.g. break up, listen to) 599-600 type of 551; following article
dropped 70.6; these type of 551.2 typical preposition 449

ugly adjective, not adverb 27.1 ultra- (prefix) 445.1 un- (prefix) 445.1
unable 3

uncountable see countable under- (prefix) 445.1 under no circumstances +
inversion (auxiliary before subject) 302.7 under, below, underneath and
beneath 100

understand non-progressive verb 471.2; + object + to be 607.3; + object
+ -ing form 296.1; can understand 125.3; I understand that... 243; make
oneself understood 335.2; so I understand 539.3; there is understood to
be 418.4 understanding complicated sentences 515 unemployed the
unemployed 17.1 uni- (prefix) 445.1 unimportant for ...to 291.4 union
with singular or plural verb and pronoun 526.1 United States + singular
verb/ pronoun 527.6 university preposition 450;

expressions without article 70.1 unless 601; + present with future
meaning 601.3; and if not 601.1 unlikely 327; adjective, not adverb 27.1
unnecessary for ... to 291.4 until and till 602; + past participle (e.g.
until cooked) 411.6; + present tense with future meaning 602.4; and
before 602.7; and by 602.6; and to 602.2; not used for distance 602.3 up
and down {up/down the road etc) 603

up to (distance, quantity) 602.3 upbringing and education 113 upward(s)
614

us 428-9; meaning ‘me' 429.6; us women etc 429.1; weak and strong form
616.3

use anyI no use 57.3; is it any use expecting...? etc 295.5; structure
with there 587.2 used be used to (.. .ing) 605 used + infinitive (past
habits etc) 604;

and would 633.8 usual jbr... to 291.4; as usual 77 usually position
22.3, 24.2

vacation 248

vanished active past participle 409.3 verb + infinitive 282; + for... to
291 verb + infinitive or -ing form 296.4;

special cases 299 verb + -ing form 296 verb + object + complement (e.g.
They elected her President) 607; passive (e.g. She was elected
President) 419 verb + object + infinitive 283; passive (e.g. He is
believed tobe...) 418 verb + object + -ing form 296.2 verb
complementation what can follow a verb? 606 verb forms in older English
392 verbs of movement she came in running, she entered running or she
ran in 608 verbs with active and passive meanings (e.g. I opened the
door f the door opened) 609 verbs with particles and prepositions (e.g.
break up, listen to) 599-600 verbs with prepositions passive structures
416 verbs with two objects 610; in passive

415

vertebra plural 524.4 very 611; and so 538.2; and such 568.4; and too
595; and very much 611; very ... indeed 273.1; very and much with past
participles 410.4; very best etc 140.4

very much 357.7, 611; (adverb) 611.4; and very 611; position 611.4; with
comparatives and superlatives 140 vice- (prefix) 445.1 view in my view
157.16 vital + subjunctive 567.2 vital for ... to 291.4 vocabulary
uncountable 148.3 voice preposition 450 volcano plural 523.3 volume
389.19

voyage, travel, journey and trip 597

wait 612; wait and see etc 53.1; wait, expect, hope and look forward 196
waiter and waitress 222.4 wake active or passive meaning 609.1;

wake, awake and (a)waken 86 wank (taboo word / swearword) 575 wanna (=
want to) 308.4, 613.4 want structures and meanings 613; in negative
sentences 369.4; nonprogressive verb 471.2; + -ing form with passive
meaning 613.3; want and will 629.8; meaning 'need' 613.3; want to not
possible in passive 418.6 -ward(s) (suffix) 614 warm be warm 92.1 warn +
object + infinitive 283 was replacing were (e.g. ifl was) 312.9; if...
was to 261.2; weak and strong form 616.3 wash without -self 493.9 watch
-ing form or infinitive 299.5;

watch, look at and see 506 way 615; expressions with no

preposition 451.9, 615.1; in the same way 157.4; inf on the way 615.5;
the way (that) she spoke to me etc 498.6, 615.2; way of...ing f way
to... 615.3; way of and means o/615.4 we 428-9; inclusive and exclusive
meanings 429.5; we who 498.12; we women, you men etc 428.10; weak and
strong form 616.3 wear be wearing 164.3 weather uncountable 148.1,
149.4;

countable use 149.3; the weather 69.4 weekends atf on weekends 312.9
weekly adjective and adverb 27.1 weigh progressive and non-progressive
uses 471.3 weight expressions with no preposition 451.8 weight use of be
92.2 welcome to ... 284.2; Welcome homef back 545.9; You're welcome
545.19 well (adjective and adverb) 617; (adverb) comparative and
superlative 138; position 12.3; well and good 617.1; as well 46-47, 343,
78 well (discourse marker) 157.16,17,20 well-known comparative and
superlative 137.4 well-read active past participle 409.4 well worth
632.6 Welsh the Welsh 17.2, 364 were instead of was after if 258, 264;
after as iflthough 74.2; after wish 630.4; was replacing were (e.g. iff
was) 312.9; were she meaning 'if she were* etc 261.5; were to in
(/“-clauses 261.2; weak and strong form 616.3 wert older English form of
were 392 west and western etc 172; capital letters 172.3 what (question
word) 622; exclamations 195.2; questions with what as subject 486; What?
(asking for repetition) 545.8; what to 277.2; what, which and who 622;
what, why

and how 252.4; word order in indirect questions 278.7 what (relative
pronoun) 497; no matter what 378; What I need is etc 130

what... like and how 253 what about...? 252.4 what else 183.1 what ever
624 what if 571 what is more 157.11 what on earth, the hell, the fuck
etc 624

What time...? 82.7 whatever 625; and no matter what 378.2; meaning 'at
all' 625.8; short answer 625.7; whatever else 183.1 when with simple
past or past perfect 424.1; + present tense with future meaning 580.2;
and z/618; dropped after time, day, year etc 498.6; in relative
structures: the day when etc

130.2, 494.10; no matter when 378; when .. .mg 411.6; when, as and while
73; when else 183.1; when ever 624; when turning, when ready etc

73.4, 177.11 whenever 625; and no matter when 378.2; whenever else 183.1
where + infinitive 277.2; dropped after somewhere, anywhere etc 498.6;
in relative structures: the place where etc 130.2, 494.10; no matter
where 378; to dropped 619; where else 183.1; where on earth, the hell,
the fuck etc 624

where's + plural noun 532.4 whereas 157.2

wherever 625; and no matter where

378.2

whether + present tense with future meaning 580.2; and r/621; in
indirect questions 276.3; whether... or 620 which (question word) 622;
which of 622.3; which one 395.5; in which case etc 498.5; no matter
which 378; none of which etc 498.8; questions with which as subject 486;
which* what and wlu> 622; word order in indirect questions 278.7 which
relative pronoun (e.g. the car which...) 494-495,498; referring to a

whole clause (e.g\_\_\_\_which surprised

everybody) 494.9 whichever 625; and no matter which

378.2

while, as and when 73; while asleep etc 177,11; while in Germany etc
73.4; showing contrast 157.2; while...ing

411.6

who (question word) 622; and whom 623, 312.9; questions with who as
subject 486; weak and strong form 616.3; with else 183.1 who relative
pronoun (e.g. the man who ...) 494-495, 498; he! she who 429.9; I who,
you who etc 498.12; no matter who 378; and whom 623, 312.9; meaning 'the
person who'

498.19

who, which and what 622 who ever 624

who on earth, the hell, the fuck etc 624 whoever 625; and no matter who
378.2; whoever else 183.1 whole and all 40; the whole of 40.5; on the
whole 157.12 whom (question word) 623, 312.9 whom relative pronoun (e.g.
the person whom ...) 494, 623, 312.9; some of whom etc 498.8 whore
(taboo word / swearword) 575 who's and whose 627 whose (possessive
question word)

441.2, 626; questions with whose ... as subject 486 whose relative
pronoun (e.g. the person whose keys 1 found) 496; no matter whose 378;
whose, of whomI which and that... 0/496.2 why + infinitive without to
628.3; and why not 628; in relative structures [the reason why) 130.2,
494.10, 498.6; why, what and how 252.4; with else

183.1

why ever 624

why on earth, the hell, the fuck etc 624 Why should she? etc 482.2
wicked pronunciation 18 wide adjective and adverb 27.2; and broad 115;
and large 106.4; and widely 27.2 widen 128.9

widow and widower 222.4 wife plural 524.1

will various uses 629; and shall 212, 217-220; and want 629.8;
decisions, promises, threats, refusals, instructions, orders, requests
217; future auxiliary 212, 216-220; in if-clauses 260; replacing shall
312.9; weak and strong form 616.3; different meanings of will you ...?
218.4; will have to, have (got) to (future obligation) 361.2 willing for
...to 291.3 win and beat 93 wind and wound 304.2 winter with or without
the 70.9 wish (noun) structure with should

521.1

wish (verb) meanings and structures 630; + object + infinitive 283;
nonprogressive verb 471.2; tenses after

wish 630.4,5; wish ... would 630.5; with two objects 610.1 wishes
sending good wishes 545.13 with meanings and use 631; and by (tools,
method etc) 119 with reference to 157.1 without .. .mg 411.6; without
and except 194.6; and instead of 301.2 wolf plural 524.1

woman plural 524.2; without article 70.8; woman or women in noun + noun
compounds 531.2 wonder I wondered I was wondering in polite requests
436.1,2 won't refusals 217.4 word order basic word order 509 adjectives:
order before nouns 15; position 12,13; with as, how, too and so 14

adverbs: position 21-25 always and never with imperatives

268.7

complement before heavy object

607.1

compounds like English-speaking

410.1

declarative questions (e.g. You're working late?) 481 direct and
indirect objects 610.2,3 exclamations 195 fronting 513 in older English
392 indirect questions 276, 278 information structure 512 inversion
302-303 objects with phrasal verbs 599.4 participles after nouns (e.g.
the people questioned) 410.2 position of subordinate clauses 510.3
prepositions 452, 416.1 reporting verbs (e.g. said John) 156, 303

questions 480

for word order with particular words and expressions, see entries for
ago; all; also; as well; back; both; each; else; enough; just now; last;
next; only; opposite; ought; quite; rather; such; used to; whole work
uncountable 148.3; expressions without article 70.1 works (= factory)
singular and plural the same 524.3 worshippers etc spelling 562.7 worth
structures 632; I didn't think it worth complaining etc 295.5 worthwhile
632.5 would various uses 633; after wish 630.5; and used to 633.8; would
or should after t and we 518.5; future in the past 221; I would meaning
If 1 were you. I would' 264; in {/-clauses

262; in indirect speech 275.3, 278.3; in sentences with if258-259; past
tense instead of would after conjunctions 426.1; replacing should 312.9;
used to make questions etc less direct 436.4; weak and strong form 616.3
would like 325.6; softening expression 437.3; would have liked to have
seen etc 288.2

would rather 491.2; negative structure

491.2

Would you mind ...? 351.2 wound and wind 304.2 wreaths pronunciation
525.4 wretched pronunciation 18 write with one and two objects 610.1,7
written and spoken English 310 written English paragraphs 406;
understanding complicated sentences 515; use and avoidance of repetition
500.3,5,7 wrong adjective and adverb 27.2; comparative and superlative
137.5; preposition 449; there's something wrong 587.2; wrong to 284.2;
wrong for ...to 291.4

-y (suffix) 445.4

/all (AmE dialect form of plural you) 429.8 yard (measurements) 389.18
ye (dialect form of plural you) 429.8;

(older English) 392 yearly adjective and adverb 27.1 years old 32

yes and no 634; in answers to negative questions 368.4, 634.1 yet
non-affirmative word 381; after superlatives 139.8; tenses 566.7, 455.5;
yet, still and already 566; discourse marker emphasising contrast 157.3
you 428-429; you folks!guys 312.1, 429.8; ye, yiz, y'all etc (dialect
plurals of you) 429.8; you know (discourse marker) 157.17; you men etc
428.10; you, one and they (indefinite personal pronouns) 396; you who
498.12; weak and strong form 616.3 You're welcome 433.5, 545.19 young
the young 17.1 your 441; weak and strong form 616.3 Your health 545.12
yours 442

Yours faithfully etc 146.7 yourself * and yourselves 493 youse (dialect
form of plural you) 429.8 youths pronunciation 525.4

zero 389.4
